I
can
sorry I did not think I would cry on
this podcast so
much Lane Norton scientist record
setting bodybuilder and is one of the
most respected voices in the health and
nutrition space who debunks all the
different Fitness and Nutrition myths
out there let's go to the technical
stuff ooh yeah let's do that calories in
calories out so the first point of
confusion a lot of people may think
they're in a calorie deficit but they're
not because one people don't really
understand portion sizes if you've never
had the experience of like weighing out
your food you will be shocked and the
other thing is artificial sweetness I've
wondered for a while whether Diet Coke
is healthy or not if we look at the
randomized control trial they saw 6 kg
of weight loss just from switching
people from regular soda to diet soda
now when they compare it versus water
this is going to be the most commented
thing about in this entire interview I'm
sure they found that what are the big
misconceptions about intermittent
fasting is it okay if I get deep into
the Weeds on this one go ahead in
studies people in the intermittent
fasting groups tend to lose more weight
but it's not because of anything magic
about intermittent fasting it's because
what's your thoughts on his impact
overall I think it's a net positive and
here's why when it comes to weight loss
people are Googling how to lose belly
fat practically it's kind of irrelevant
because and then is sugar addictive this
one's going to get me in trouble too
so it's absolutely crazy to me that so
many of you have decided to watch our
show um and so many of you have decided
to subscribe to our show we now have
five million subscribers on YouTube
which is a number that I just can't
comprehend and it's a dream that I
absolutely never could have had we
started the DI of just over three years
ago now and in my wildest expectations
we might have had 100,000 subscribers by
now so you can imagine how shocked I am
that so many of you have chosen to tune
into these conversations every week um
and spend some time with us so thank you
and I made a deal with you I made a deal
that if you subscrib to this show that
we would continue to raise the bar and
in 2024 we're going to raise the bar
like never before I've been working for
the last 9 months on a surprise for all
of you that have subscribed to the show
and I'm very excited to deliver that for
you the production's going to change
we're going to go even further with our
guests and we're going to tell even more
Global stories so as always if you
appreciate what we're doing here the
simple free favorite ask from you is to
hit the Subscribe button let's get on
with the
[Music]
episode
Lane who are you and what is the mission
you're
on I'm trying to
make Fitness information more accessible
Fitness more accessible to everyone and
trying to act as a bridge
between academic research and your
average person because so much Gets Lost
in Translation because social media the
news it is a fire hose of information a
lot of which is misinformation or you
only get part of the story and so I have
noticed people are so frustrated because
they feel like they understand what it
is to eat healthy and then a new
documentary comes out a new podcast
comes out a new article comes out and
says oh NOP you're whatever it is you're
doing it's wrong and here's why and I
just want to help clear up some of that
confusion and help people understand the
big stuff that really matters versus not
getting lost in the weeds of the stuff
that just doesn't matter that much and
when you say Fitness how do you define
that because you talked about you then
talked about diet and food so what is
the sort of bucket that you put yourself
in what are the categories that you
really focus on great question but you
know I would say that my wheelhouse is
nutrition so I did a PhD in nutritional
sciences and I also
feel pretty equipped to interpret
exercise information as well and what is
your so that's your academic sort of
background what is your lived experience
what experiences have you had as a coach
to people as a as a trainer in your own
personal life that have added to that
academic information that you have great
question so I'll try to give The
Abridged version of this um I got
bullied a lot uh growing up as really
skinny kid hyperactive weird you know
and so when you're young what makes you
stand out is actually you know not such
a good thing and uh I got bullied a lot
and I started lifting weights
to I thought if I got bigger muscles you
know girls would pay attention to me and
I'd stop getting bullied it didn't work
for either of those two things but I did
gain more confidence not because I built
bigger muscles but because the process
of lifting and getting through plateaus
and moving through setbacks and all
those sorts of things that's what built
confidence and I started lifting when I
was 15 and when I got to
college I changed my major because I
decided I was going to do my first
bodybuilding show I did it I won the
Teen Division and I was hooked I was
like this is the thing I want to do but
back in you know this is 2001 I was 19
I'm 42 now the Avenues to make money in
Fitness were basically be a personal
trainer open a gym start a supplement
company try to be Mr
Olympia and I I didn't know how feasible
any of those were so I started looking
at a PhD literally for no other reason I
had no idea what I wanted to do with my
life but I figured if I delay the real
world by four to eight year four to six
years maybe I'll have it figured out by
then but in that meantime I had started
posting on different bodybuilding
message boards and
so I would get a bunch of emails about
my articles and people asking me
questions and I was like basically doing
full-on diets and nutrition for people
for free because I just liked it and
then when I got to grad school I was
like man I you know this is a lot of my
time now maybe if I just like charge
people a little something I can do this
instead of a teaching assistantship make
a little bit of money you know didn't
really think much of it and so I took my
first online client back in 2005 and
within three years I was making a
full-time income from it with no
advertising just word of mouth and then
in my fourth year I think was the first
year I ever made like six figures from
it I remember
thinking what is happening I want to
take one step back um because it's clear
from what you said there but also clear
from a lot of the research that I did on
you and your backstory that much of the
driving motivation behind why you are
what you are today and why you help
people and why you do the work you do
and make the content you make was
because of this early experience with
bullying and I've sat here with so many
people who are real anomalies in their
lives for a variety of different reasons
you know maybe in business or or in
science or um in sport and I so often
find that the the reason why they're
brilliant is also fundamentally
Interlink to the reason why they
struggle or they struggled shall I say
and in your story that seems to
be very pertinent I read a quote you
said on a video you made seven years ago
where you said I had intense and
sustained emotional bullying I would be
put in a corner by four to five people
and be obliterated
repeatedly yeah I mean you know when I
I'll tell people like the the reason I
started lifting weights in bodybuilding
it was not the noblest of reasons you
know it was very
much you say I'm worthless I'm going to
prove you wrong you know and uh even I
mean I I would love to say that it has
no remnants today but I would be that
would be a lie right um some of the
stuff I still struggle with in terms of
I have a hard time trusting myself a lot
of the times because I got told for so
long or trusting some decisions I make I
got told for so long you do it wrong you
know you suck you're worthless you know
those sorts of things when you went to
therapy you were diagnosed with a form
of PTSD Bing PTSD they call it yeah my
my therapist she diagnosed me
and I remember saying I don't have PSD
like that's that's for soldiers that's
for Bel and she goes first off Lane you
don't like it when people correct you as
a professional in your field don't
correct me
and you're right you didn't witness
people die nothing like that but trauma
is trauma and her explanation of it was
it is all relative and it may not have
been you know hores from
war but for your brain it was
traumatic and the way she explained it
is trauma is something that causes you
to react or act in response to something
even after that event has passed right
so for me for example I've struggled in
personal
relationships where either Partners or
friends trying to give me feedback and I
immediately get defensive very defensive
and if you read about relationships
that's not great right it's one of the
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse for
relationships and I never UND I just
thought well I'm just explaining myself
I'm just and then now I understand it's
oh it's
because that was my response to the
bullying because feedback or criticism
to me feels like bullying even though
it's not so you have a defense mechanism
because you had to defend yourself back
then and it's so interesting the the
things that we adopt to survive when
we're young become maladaptive when we
get older it's difficult to unpick all
of that when you're an adult isn't it
because it's as you know it's very hard
wide they say you can't teach an old dog
new tricks but I've we've I've got my
own trauma responses that I'm still
trying to work through and I'm now aware
of them but they still on a bad day on
an unslept day they can still come to
the surface I tell people I don't know
if you can like completely undo your
default setting right but I think what
you can do is get mindful of it and
learn tools to manage it right and I
mean it's interesting how this ties into
obesity because I used to be somebody
who i' I've never been obese never been
overweight nothing like that when I got
to grad school I was very much more
towards the side of if you're obese it's
cuz you're lazy it's your fault you know
and then the more I just
observed I realized that can't be true
because look at all these OB there's so
many obese people that are successful in
other areas of their life where they
apply a lot of
discipline what is it about this thing
right and I remembered I read a study
and I I I hopefully I get this correct
cuz it was a while back but they looked
at obese women
and they found that obese women were 50%
I believe 50% more likely to have uh
sexual assault trauma in their past and
you also look at the Obesity
literature and people who are obese tend
to have a greater reward response from
food whereas people who are lean or
normal weight it's it's not like that
huge reward that they get it's like some
people you know they they can they can
have a drink they can have a beer they
go I like the beer you know and other
people become alcoholics right and so so
much of this stuff gets tied up
in it gets wired in as a as a kind of
coping mechanism if you look at like for
example binge
eating what's happening during a binge
is that person is getting a flood of
dopamine right they're they're they're
masking they want to mask that feeling
of whatever made them feel uncomfortable
I always tell people I'm like you don't
really find people binge eating after
they've had 8 hours of sleep at 10:00
a.m. in the morning when they're low
stress right it's at 10 p.m. at night
after a long day they've been fighting
with their spouse their kids are driving
them nuts and they just they want to
turn it all off right and I think
staying mindful is one of the hardest
things we have as humans I mean I know
what my addiction is unfortunately based
on my um current job I get way too into
social media you know I just end up up
you know it kind of started as well I'm
I'm doing work right and I'm responding
to comments and all that and pretty soon
I'm looking at my screen time and I'm
going oh my gosh right and so that was
something for me to numb up and turn my
mind off right but for other people it's
food for other people it's gambling for
other people it's alcohol for other
people it's some other drug so what do
we do with that then so do we first have
to figure out what our relationship is
on a psychological level with these
addictions with with our food for
example if we're just focusing on weight
loss to start with when you if you were
to be coaching someone would you try and
understand their um propensity to binge
to to have that sort of you like
dopamine
craving or or do you focus somewhere
else I kind of say all right like walk
me through a typical day for you walk me
through a typical week where where's
where are your struggles really at right
and one of the things I we call it the
biolane way when we when we kind of
teach our coaches is we do coaching with
you have to have two things are
critically important accountability with
empathy because if you're just the
accountability coach the drill sergeant
who's you know most people if they screw
up they've beat themselves up more than
anybody else I know I'm that way I'm
sure you're that way so you don't need
to beat them up
again the empathy portion so so if
you're just beating somebody up if
you're just holding them accountable
without empathy you just become the
drill sergeant and what happens is
people end up tuning you out or they're
not honest with you anymore because they
don't want to constantly feel like
they're failing right the empathy
portion if you just have empathy and
you're saying I'm so sorry that happened
that's so hard I understand but you're
not holding them accountable there's no
impetus for change right so it takes it
takes both MH and so the way I'd often
coach like let's take a somebody had a
binge something like that the first
thing I'd say I understand why that
happened you know that's really
hard where what was the antecedent to
this like what what started this right
okay now let's look at if we had to go
back and do it over again what are some
things we might be able to do to put
some to put some barriers right so I had
I had one client he's a a hedge fund
manager and when he started with me he
was binging pretty much I would say
almost every day and I said okay where
do you find that this is happening
and he said well usually it's after
everybody's gone to bed and you know um
I just find myself in the kitchen and it
just happens so okay so it's not
reasonable to lock yourself in your room
right but what if we just did a few
things to increase your mindfulness
right put a Posta on the cabinet where
you where you keep that the junk food
right not saying anything nasty or
anything but I just said write down am I
hungry or am I just upset
then on your on your door right lock it
from the inside it's not you know it
doesn't keep you from going out but you
have to unlock it right like you're
having to turn your brain on right and
it the more barriers you can put there
the the better it gets the more sort of
mindful moments you can have where you
make you have to kind of make a decision
and you don't you come out of autopilot
CU I notice when whenever I have my
binge moments which happens once in a
while it is like unthinking yeah it's
just like a robot has taken over this
exactly and with this like this
particular client right he'd have a
rough day at work hedge fund manager
very stressful job I say okay if you've
had a rough day at work first thing to
do when you're driving home say man I've
had a tough day at work this is usually
where I'd have a binge session like say
it out loud like name it you know what I
mean sometimes just naming it is enough
to stop it I mean I not the same thing
but I struggle with I'm sure you know as
ADHD during convers
ation I have something to say I have
something to say I want to say it I want
to say it I want to say it right and
I'll end up cutting people off and
making them feel bad and so I still have
that inclination but now I'll go if I
start I go oh I'm I'm sorry I jumped in
please finish right and so just like
calling it out to yourself can make a
huge difference on changing the behavior
that which gets monitored gets changed I
really want to focus on this point of
the psychology of both exercise and
weight loss because in all the research
that I do on even your conversations and
other conversations clearly the like
fundamental that sits underneath doing
all the things we're going to talk about
is like having the motivation the
discipline and mastering one's own like
mind because as you kind of said we can
have all the diet plans in the world and
many or all of them might work but
without the psychology of how to lose
weight and to motivate ourselves to get
to the gym none of it really matters so
what else do we need to think about when
we're trying to understand how to
Master like the Beast Within our mind
there's a lot to unpack here good I'll
start with this
um do you know Ethan sule you familiar
with him so Ethan is an actor he was in
uh my name aurl he was in American
History X and he was in Remember the
Titans some of the big movies he's been
in uh Wolf of Wall Street as well and he
was over 500 lbs like he and like
everybody knows him as the the really
big guy in those movies and those shows
now he's like 220 pounds and looks like
he would play a military operator in a
show right
and he said something that really stuck
with me he said um if the house is on
fire just get out of the house we can
worry about why the fire started later
but just get out and there's so much
like paralysis by analysis out there
that people don't end up actually
starting and if I put two plates in
front of you you know with different
food yeah we can cribble but for the
most part if I'm sitting something out
with the cheeseburger fries and all this
kind okay versus lean meats vegetables
we know which one is more conducive to
to health right people will argue about
these little things low carb low fat
those sorts of
things just get out of the house stop
stop eating so so much of this very
energy dense hyper palatable food start
moving away and Ethan I think it was
Ethan he has this he has this thing he
says when he um when he uh whenever he
posts a picture in the gym he'll say I
killed my clone today and I never I
never quite understood it and then I
read a um a systematic review of
successful weight loss maintainers now
what that means
is weight loss we know diets can help
you lose weight but they don't tend to
work long term because people their
adherence wains and they just kind of
regain the weight over time and if we
look at like out about three years after
initial weight loss it's like depending
on the statistics you use it's anywhere
from 90 95% of people end up regaining
almost all the weight they lost and this
study was about people who had
successfully kept it off for a long
period of time so this is the unicorns
right the the 5 10% of people who
actually had that long-term success and
there were things on there that you
would expect um you know they they
practiced some form of cognitive
restraint they uh did cognitive
restraint being um counting calories or
doing low carb or time restricted eating
or some form of restraint but the thing
that stood out to me that really grabbed
my attention was so many of them
specified and pointed out they felt like
they had to develop a new identity and
I texted Ethan and I was like is this
what you mean by I killed my clone he
goes that is exactly what I mean and so
one of the things I'll tell people now
is think of the person that you want to
become picture
them think about what do you think their
habits and behaviors look like on a
daily
basis now reverse now start to reverse
engineer that right and you mentioned
motivation and I my thoughts have
changed about motivation
a lot of
people wait to get motivated or inspired
and hey like I think all that stuff's
great but in the course of anything and
I'm I would bring it back to you in in
building a
startup I'm guessing there were days
where you were not motivated to do what
you were doing right yeah most days
right right so many days so motivation
is great when it come I say that's like
nitrous on a car right give you a quick
boost and make you go a lot
faster but
discipline the is the gas tank that is
it doesn't I tell people detach your
feelings from the process
okay I have a very cold calculus when I
look at my
goals what is my goal what will it take
to get there some form of work in time
right no matter how you slice
it let's let's take um so I won uh the
master World Championship in
powerlifting in
2022 thank you took me I went to open uh
worlds in 2015 set a world squat record
there but then went through a lot of
different injuries and a lot of pain
took me seven years to get back and and
win but there were times where I was
very unmotivated to go to the gym
because I couldn't lift heavy I was you
know in a lot of
pain but I knew if I want to get back
there this is what it's going to take
and so it was it doesn't matter if I'm
motivated I have to do the things I said
I was going to do and I tell people try
to detach how you feel from the process
it takes to get there and that's really
hard for a lot of people to do but
here's the thing as you do the
process you start to see the results and
then the motivation becomes more
sustained right the the hard part is
when you are down in the ditches and you
you aren't seeing that progress so when
I'm coaching people on this
stuff a lot of it is trying to build
their confidence and so many people
they'll start a new year's resolution
let's say because it's beginning of the
year I'm going to go to the gym 5 days a
week I'm like stop you haven't been
going at all how about this you're going
to be active at least an hour for 3 days
a week let's start there if you go 5
days fantastic
right but it's different if you said
you're going to go 5 days you only go
three you feel really bad about yourself
you say you're going to go three and you
go three feel really good about yourself
what's the harm of feeling bad about
yourself so there was a year 2017 where
I said I may call everyday Steve and I
was like I'm going to go to the gym
every every day of 2018 I believe it was
MH and I'm not going to tell you what
happened cuz I think you
know but I I want to ask the question
what is the harm of setting a huge goal
and then failing and feeling bad about
yourself you know there's a lot of
different versions of like what builds
confidence but I think one of those
things is keeping the promises you make
to yourself right and also just doing
the thing you said you were going to do
and that's why I tell people like hey
for me if I say I'm going to go four or
five times a week that's not a problem
because for me it takes discipline to
keep me out of the gym right like I love
that that's fun for
me but if you're somebody who hasn't
been
going just start with something like I'm
not saying don't be ambitious
overall but you have to build confidence
in increments right like so for example
I'm going to go back to my own personal
experience I in 2015 I set a world squat
record 668 lbs at 205 lb body weight
class but when I first started lifting I
was horrible at squats I've got long
legs um I am in fact uh um one of the
world powerlifting coaches looked at the
video of my Squat and said
I I don't know how you did that
and squats were very intimidating to me
I would get really scared trying to do
it my back would hurt you know all these
sorts of things you know eventually I
ended up squatting 668 pounds but the
first time I went in the gym I wasn't
able to do it the first five years 10
years I couldn't I couldn't even imagine
that right and one of the things I tell
people about confidence is I thought
when I if I squatted that amount of
weight 4 or 500 lbs would feel easy it
still feels heavy I just got better at
handling it right and I kind of use that
euphemism for life that analogy for life
because life doesn't get easier but you
can get better at handling those things
and the confidence that I built to be
able to do that came through the
repetition doing it over and over and
over again and that's what people need
the problem is they don't get the
repetition in because they do things
like you were talking about which is
they start to it'd be like me going in
the gym my first time saying I'm going
to squat 400 lb I'm gonna get crumpled
into a heap right but if I do it if I do
what I can do at the time and slowly
build that confidence that can wind up
in me doing something that I never
thought possible for myself I think it
was Jordan Peterson that said to me when
he deals with some of his clinical
patients the starting point for them is
so small that it almost makes makes them
feel shameful so they don't do it so he
says he's dealt with people who
literally can't get out of bed because
their depression is so severe and
telling someone that their goal is just
to walk down the hall and walk back feel
so small and inconsequential and so full
of shame that that they just think no
that doesn't matter I'm not going to do
that and there are a lot of people out
there that are listening right now and
they think about where their starting
point might be and it might literally be
getting out of the house putting their
trainers on and going for a 5-minute
walk but in their heads they'll go
that's not going to do anything that's
not going to get me to that Mountaintop
that I that I know I need to get to so
I'm not going to bother a lot of people
like that and I mean you know you can
take your cliche that you want you know
Journey Of A Thousand Miles begins with
a single step how to eat an elephant one
bite at a time I mean it's cliche but
it's very true right and I think if
you're climbing a mountain if you're
only looking at the top you're going to
feel like you're getting nowhere right
so if you want to climb a mountain have
in mind the mountain that you want to
climb but when you're climbing it look
at the next ledge and just do that as
the checkpoint right so somebody asked
me once if somebody had a lot of weight
to lose like over 100 pounds where would
you tell them to start I'd say you know
I'd look at where they're at right now
what are their habits their
behaviors what are they doing exercise--
wise let's get them to the next ledge
right so let's let's just you know we
can go into this too but you know if
they're drinking a bunch of soda per day
trying to get them to go straight to
water that might be very daunting for
them right okay well diet soda is better
than than regular soda and and people
will argue about it but I can cite the
studies on this okay they're they're um
you know they're eating certain foods
can we do something somewhat close to
what they're already doing but find a
way to cut out some calories from that
right let's let's try and I'm going to
try and meet them closer to where they
are and then slowly pull them back this
way when you think about what it takes
for someone to make that decision to
change their life so often it seems that
there's some kind of adverse event like
I'm talking here about the why that sits
behind the reason to to change to change
to lose the weight to build the muscles
do you see that often that there's some
kind of catalyst moment you actually see
a lot of parallels between like the way
adex talk and people who have lost a lot
of weight uh in terms of they had to
develop a new identity they are often
have to get a new set of friends not on
purpose but if you think about if you
were hanging around a certain type of
people and you became and you were very
overweight you've probably fallen in
with people who have similar habits to
you and even if you still care about
those people as you start to come out of
that there's a few things that are
happening one if they're not joining you
in the things you're doing that creates
a gap and uh people can also be very
insecure when people they know start
improving themselves
and they start trying to pull them back
in crab crabs in the bucket why why do
you got to eat that why can't you enjoy
this why can't you you know that's
because you're holding up a mirror to
them by changing your life right correct
correct so you know I I don't think he
reminds me talking about this my uh my
brother um was an addict and um he he
like he went to prison for a period of
time um he had a lot of really bad stuff
go down in his life and I one day I
asked him I'm like was it was going to
prison was that like your rock bottom
and he goes no he goes honestly I just
woke up one day and realize I lose
everything I get a job and I lose it I
get some money and I lose it I get a
relationship and I lose it I just got
sick and tired of
losing and not always but you hear a lot
of similar stories from people who
drastically changed their lives as they
just got to the point where they were
sick and
tired of being that way and they just
realize that if I don't make some kind
of change this is going to
continue and I think one that takes a
self-awareness that which is hard and
having that mirror brought to you is
really hard um I can relate in other
areas of life but that why really is at
the core of it because at the end of the
day if you don't have a really strong
why it is hard when you start to lose
motivation you know I was watching a
story of a guy who had a heart attack
when he was like in his 40s and then he
lost 150 lbs and he's like
whenever I
started whenever I didn't have
motivation or I started feeling like I
wanted to fall back into bad habits I
thought about my kids growing up without
a dad and it made it very easy for me
and so when you have that really strong
why it it it makes it easier to get
through it I'm not saying either me or
you are going to be able to figure out
an answer here but I feel
like maybe there's something we can
offer to the question about how to
cultivate the Y is there anything that
you do on those days any disciplines you
think you can put in place that will
just keep the why um front and center
I'm going to throw out one something
that kind of helped me a little bit was
just changing the background on my phone
to um an image that reminded me of who I
wanted to be and it just meant that even
if it gives me a 1% psychological
reinforcement in the direct so that I
fall on the correct side of a decision
relating to diet or Fitness maybe that
would help you know because it's it's
there a couple things I think about um I
think about the people I care about in
my life and wanting to make them proud
think about my kids you know um how
would I want now I'm going to get
emotional how would I how would I want
them to remember their dad you know um I
can remember um coming back from all
these injuries and and I was lifting in
the garage one day my daughter she was
uh six at the time and she's such a
little spark plug
and she would watch me and sometimes she
would come in and like do some LTS with
me and stuff and uh I was kind of
explaining to her why I do this stuff
and why it was important to me and I
said you know Dad almost was a world
champion I got really close and you know
I that would be something that I would I
would really treasure if I got the
chance to do that and she said are you
going to try and be a champion again and
she said it in the kid way that like but
oh my gosh when she said that whenever I
felt tired whenever I felt down or
whatever I just remember my daughter
saying are you going to try to be a
champion again made it easy you know and
so I had my like it's going to sound
goofy but at Worlds in
2022 I was going through a lot of
personal stuff at the time and uh I had
picture of my kids on my phone and I was
looking at that and I was almost in
tears before I'd go out for lifts
because I was so amped up and psyched up
and and that was that was my why so I'm
thinking about my kids and also think
about you know my parents and like great
people wanting to make them proud and
then honestly like my my personal hero
is my grandfather so my grandfather is
part of the greatest
Generation Um he was the funniest person
I ever met with the most Integrity of
anybody I ever met and so so many times
when I think about the person I want to
be I I think about my
grandfather and um you know still to
this day I'll think about them before I
if I feel like low motivation or if I've
really screwed something up um you know
like that sort of thing let's go to the
technical stuff yes let's start with so
we're talking here about dieting and
weight loss if I'm trying to lose weight
should I be counting my calories ah so
the first point of confusion people
assume calories and calories out is the
same thing as counting calories that's
like saying the law that in order to
save money you have to earn more than
you spend is the same thing as keeping a
budget keeping a budget can help you
save money but it's not the same thing
so let's break down calories in calories
out calories inside pretty
straightforward it is the food you eat
right the calories and the food that you
eat now I would add one caveat to that
the metabolizable energy so when we say
calories calories is literally a unit of
energy and so I'll have some people say
well calories aren't a real thing you
can't look at calories on a microscope
you're right it refers to the potential
energy contained in the chemical bonds
of food that through the process of
digestion absorption and Metabolism that
energy is captured in one way or another
so that's the energy into the system
calories out is more complicated so that
involves a few different uh energy
outputs the first one being your BAS
metabolic rate so your BMR is basically
the cost of keeping the lights on so if
you just laid down didn't move that's
how many calories your body would burn
and that's actually the Maj for most
people the majority of the calories they
burn per day it's around 50 to 70%
depending on how active they are and it
fluctuates person to person so as as a
man with fairly big muscles there you
yours will be bigger than mine because
correct you have more going on over
there yeah there there you can tie about
at least based on the regressions you
can tie about 90% of the variance in BMR
to someone's lean mass okay if you look
at the studies it's very tightly
correlated with lean mass right because
lean tissue is more metabolically active
than non-lean
tissue so bmr's one bucket then you have
What's called the thermic effect of food
so your
TEF um our bodies are kind of like for
lack of a poor analogy but analogy that
works is cars like internal combustion
engine you don't just put petrol or gas
in your car and all a sudden it just
spontaneously starts up you got to start
it the battery puts in energy so you can
get energy out of the fuel right your
body has to put in energy to extract the
energy out of the food that you eat and
so a lot of the confusion people say
well calories in calories out assumes
that all calories equal it doesn't
because TEF accounts for this because
for example protein has a higher thermic
effect of food than carbohydrate or fat
so if you look at um so protein requires
more energy to basically process it
correct so if you if you look at um like
say fats for example TEF is about 0 to
3% meaning if you eat 100 calories from
dietary fat you capture about 97 to 100
calories of it carbohydrates about 5 to
10% so if you eat 100 calories from
carbohydrate you capture about 90 to 95
calories from it a lot of that depends
on the fiber content the more fiber the
lower the metabolizable energy so fiber
has a higher thermic effect of food as
well then protein is about 70 80% so if
you eat 100 calories from protein you
capture about 70 to 80 calories so some
people out there will say well there's
negative calorie no those don't exist um
you're always getting more energy out of
it than you put in but some are lower
than others right and
so that TEF is about 5 to 10% of the
energy you expend per day so now we've
got BMR TEF and then you have your
physical activity which we can further
break into two different buckets the
first one is obvious which is exercise
right you go to the gym burn some
calories and that's energy out the
second one is less intuitive it's called
non-exercise activity thermogenesis neat
and that is the small unconscious
movements that you make per day give you
an example like what I'm doing like now
it's not subconscious because I'm
thinking about it but fidgeting um when
you're talking with your hands uh pacing
right in fact they've actually shown
that people who have a more they call
obese resistant
phenotype when they eat more they tend
to just become spontaneously more active
without realizing it and so people who
are more obese prone when they eat more
food they tend to not compensate by
becoming more spontaneously active oh
interesting and people it's kind of
pedantic but it's important to
understand the difference I'll hear
people say well I'm going to take the
steps and get my knat up no no you made
a decision that's exercise Okay the
reason being neat really isn't
consciously modifiable right and so I
I'll give you an example of like a
extreme example of this so when I was
getting ready for my last bodybuilding
show back in
2010 um the fatigue that you deal with
is unbelievable it's hard to describe in
words um Soul crushing would be a way to
describe it and um I had gotten done you
know I trained two hours at the gym that
day i' done an hour of cardio got home
and I remember I sat down on the couch
and uh my my ex at my wife at the time
uh she had like real housewives of
whatever County on the TV I hated those
shows but the remote was about 7 feet
away I watched the entire show I did not
get up and move because I was so
fatigued that's an example of neat and
neat is very modifiable so they've shown
that even a 10% reduction in body weight
can reduce neat by up to 4 or 500
calories per day so you're just a lot of
people end up moving less without even
realizing it so here's the
rub this so you got your calories in you
got your calories out BMR plus TEF plus
neat plus
exercise people think of these two
things as static they're not static and
that's I talk about in the book a lot we
have various adaptations that fight us
for weight loss first of which is on the
metabolism side when you lose body
weight your BMR drops but part of that
is because you're carrying around less
weight right so if if I 200 lb and I
drop down to 180 PBS I just have less
mess to carry around and so your BMR
goes down a little bit which is again
which again is your base metabolic great
right which is the the cost of keeping
the lights on basically but there's
actually what's called metabolic
adaptation which has shown that with a
10% body weight loss on average you can
see a reduction beyond what you would
expect of 15% for
BMR so let's take an example here
because people will say well calorie
deficit didn't work for me because you
know I was eating this many calories I
was exercising this much period of time
and I was
um you know so so I like what happened
well you thought you were in a calorie
deficit but let's take me for example
okay my BMR I've had it measured it's
about it's about 2,000 calories a little
bit lower about 2,000 calories my total
daily energy expenditure is around 3,400
calories per day so that's all this
stuff added up
right but if I lose 10% of my body
weight for me 2700 calories per day is a
pretty significant calorie deficit mhm
but if I lose 10% of my body weight if I
drop my BMR by
15% 15% of 200 2,000 calories day is 300
calories drop my neat by 400 calories
that's 700 calories all of a sudden that
deficit is no longer a deficit that's
now maintenance right now this doesn't
happen all at once this is a progressive
thing over time but there's a reason
like I tell people I'm like if was a
calorie deficit as soon as like from the
time you did it indefinitely you would
starve to death right but all of us most
of us have had the experience of
starting a diet losing some weight and
eventually even though you're eating the
same way doing the same exercise it
plateaus right and then you have to do
something else to further establish that
deficit and the other way so that's on
one side where that's kind of working
against you to try to bring you back to
your original body weight right we talk
about weight weight
regain the other side is your hunger
hormones go up as you diet right so
they've actually then they have shown
obese people who lose weight to become
normal weight when you compare them to
normal weight people who were never
obese with the
same uh similar lean body
mass the formerly obese people have a
lower total daily energy
expenditure and they have higher markers
of hunger
they have higher appetite so it's
working on both sides of that equation
to push you back so The Devil's Advocate
argument is well you know I ate this
amount of calories that should have been
a calorie deficit and I didn't lose
weight or it's the you know all calories
are created equal I'll tell people all
calories are created equal because
saying a calorie is not a calorie it's
like saying uh second hands on the clock
are different no they're just a unit of
measurement all sorts of calories are
not equal so let's take um budgeting
right I used that earlier sports car
okay so let's say somebody makes million
dollars a year right if they want to
spend aund let's assume no loans just
for sake of ease if they want to spend
$150,000 on a sports car but they're
still able to pay their mortgage they
can take care of their responsibilities
and they can put money away for
retirement can they buy that sports car
sure they can right and is it a bad
investment I guess you could argue it's
a bad investment because they could put
the $150,000 in those Investments but
maybe that sports car makes them feel
good and gives them a little carrot on
the end of the stick to you know keep
working and
whatnot but if I take somebody who makes
$200,000 a year should they buy the
$150,000 sports car if it means they
can't pay their mortgage they can't um
you know save for retirement no of
course not right similar thing with
energy right so if I'm you know somebody
who's very active and I burn a lot of
calories is it a big deal if I have a
Pop-Tart say um if I'm still getting
enough protein I'm hitting my target
energy I'm uh getting enough fiber in
and my my my
micronutrients if
that gives me that little carrot on the
end of the stick to keep being
consistent not a big deal but if talking
about a smaller woman with less lean
mass who needs to eat 1,200 calories a
day to lose weight that's not a very
good investment right it's not a very
good use of funds so what I'll tell
people is you know people will say well
how do I know what a deficit is how how
do I know how many calories to eat right
because also just on that point I I
heard you talk about food labeling as
well and how inaccurate that can be so
you can you can have up to a 20% error
in food labeling right so some people
will use so what that means is
it could say 100 calories it could be 80
it could be 120 now I will say if it's
coming from a big food company and they
have pretty rigorous standards it's
probably not that far off but they're
allowed up to that right because they
recognize that some food sources are
very heterogeneous it'd be difficult to
like get it exactly
on so you'll have some people
say well see calorie counting is useless
because you can't know exactly how many
calories you're taking in and are you
going to get your BMR measured are you
going to get your neat measur meur are
you going to get this measured it can be
much more simple than
that again Financial analogy I could
make the argument that keeping a budget
is useless because you never know what
inflation is exactly doing and if you
have Investments you can get
differential you know Returns on it and
on the output side you have unexpected
expenses you have fluctuations and
expenses your power bill is going to be
different from month to month right your
car breaks down one month
but if you look at the average over time
you can get a pretty good idea of on
average what your expenses are like
right and you can get a pretty good idea
over time un let well entrepreneurs like
us but even like us you get you can
start to kind of see the trends and get
a
relatively good good idea of what it's
going to be so when it comes to calories
in and calories out yes tracking exactly
can be very very difficult but if you
are mon monitoring your body weight and
you're being consistent with how you
track you'll know if you're in a calorie
deficit and I think another thing that's
crosses people up this actually showed
up on that um that review of the
successful weight loss maintainers they
actually talked about one of the things
that um was a barrier for them or hard
for them was the weight fluctuations
because you know if you've ever if
you've ever weighed in every day have
you ever have you ever done this where
you waited every day even first thing in
the morning right up down bounces all
over the place right so actually when we
with our coaching and then with our app
we're not just looking at one weight we
encourage people to weit as long as it
doesn't cause them a lot of stress and
anxiety um weigh in Daily and then it's
taking the average of those because
daytoday changes in weight are much more
dictated by fluctuations in fluid but
week to week and month-to-month averages
reflect loss or gain of mass so for
example if you're monitoring your body
body weight you know taking
averages and looking at that over time
you'll know if you're in a calorie
deficit because on average you're seeing
it go down right now I wanted to make
one more point which is you don't have
to track calories to lose weight
absolutely not it's just one methodology
because no matter what you do you have
to have some form of restraint right and
my friend Peter AA actually breaks it
down nicely into a couple different
three buckets right you can have dietary
restraint which is low car herb
plant-based um Whole Food you know
whatever it is you're you're restricting
some sort of food group or type of food
right then you have a time restriction
you eat within a certain time frame a
certain
window then you can have just straight
up calorie restriction where you're
tracking and monitoring what you choose
to do I think a lot in terms of what is
best for an individual boils down to
their psychology and what feels easy
so this is where a lot of the diet Wars
start because somebody will do say low
carb right and they'll get results from
that and they'll say man it felt like I
wasn't even dieting and for whatever
reason that clicked with the algorithm
in their brain and felt easy and they
got progress from that but then they
assume that everyone else will have the
same response somebody else does low fat
uh somebody else does intermittent
fasting whatever have you and you have
all these stories me personally I was
the kind of person I'm the kind of
person that if I tried to restrict
certain foods I end up getting that
binge response right but if you tell me
I can eat whatever I want as long as I'm
tracking it I become ridiculously
consistent and I mean I'm still eating
mostly like Whole Food minimally
processed foods you know those sorts of
things because they're better for
satiety but I don't stress out about
having some snacks here and there that
are you know bad consistency because I'm
I'm being very consistent right how
important is that consistency it is the
most important thing so there is
actually a um meta analysis and for when
I say meta analysis think a study of
studies okay so it's not a new study
it's what they're trying to do in a
metaanalysis is they are trying to take
studies that are similar and compile
them together to see is there a
consensus here is there an overall
effect here right so there was a meta
analysis of um where they looked at 14
different like popular diets and these
ranged from low carb to you know high
carb low fat
right and what they found is on the long
term none of them were better than the
others for weight loss but when they
stratified them for adherence from least
adherent to most adherent what does that
mean uh so people who were consistent
basically so when they stratified them
for I think compliance another way to
put it when they gratifi them that way
regardless of diet a linear effect of
adherence on weight
loss so what that tells me is actually
the best diet for the individual is the
one that they consistent that can
consistently execute they all function
the same way which is you know creating
some sort of calorie deficit now some
people will say that's not true I did a
low carb diet and I was eating more food
you probably felt more satiated because
you were eating less calorie dense food
you probably were eating a greater
quantity in terms of weight of
food but you were eating less calories
is there any way to lose weight in a car
calorie Surplus not if that's the so
what I'll tell people is all right you
take in food it the carbons that you
take in they have to go somewhere right
and if you
are if you are not in a surplus what you
are say is you are creating energy out
of nothing if that's the case NASA needs
to study you because we've figured out
how to not worry about fuel on Long
space flights right we have a perpetual
motion machine um again a a lot of this
the confusion becomes when you have you
know for example metabolic adaptation
yeah so you know people they may think
they're in a calorie deficit but they're
not or they're overestimating how many
calories they burn and here's the other
that people don't want to talk about CU
this gets down to the mirror right so
there's a classic study I think it was
from
1992 um and I think the title I may
butcher it but it's discrepancy between
reported and actual calorie intake in OB
subjects I I want to say is is the name
of the study and so what they did was
they had people they screened for people
who said that they could not lose weight
even though they were eating low
calories and the the average calorie
intake that was reported by participants
was 1,200 calories a day and so they
measured a bunch of different stuff they
measured their lean mass their fat Mass
they measured their BMR they measured
their total daily energy
expenditure they found that their BMR
was very average when it was when it was
for when it was based on their lean mass
right and actually if you look at obese
people they actually have a higher BMR
and higher energy expenditure typically
than lean people but on average it's cuz
they have more lean mass because when
you have more mass to carry around your
body has to create more locomotive Mass
but when they so they and they told the
subjects we will we are going to monitor
you and we will know if you're eating
more than you say you are the average in
the study was they under reported their
calorie intake by about
50% and they over reported their
physical activity by just under 50% gez
now and some of the participants argued
with the researchers about it right
here's where people miss the message the
message a lot of people take from that
is oh see they're
lying and that's a really hard thing to
take to somebody to be like well you're
probably underreporting your calorie
intake you're probably eating more than
you think you are that feels very you
know
aggressive and I don't think it's lying
I think that one people don't really
understand portion sizes if you've never
had the experience of like weighing out
your food you will be shocked like weigh
out a serving of cereal or a serving of
ice cream or if you want to be really
depressed we out a serving of peanut
butter because the tablespoon that
you're grabbing I promise you is
probably two or three servings and then
you know like if the first time I
weighed out ice cream when I when I
started weighing my food I was like this
is a
serving it's like two bites you know and
so I don't think people have a really
good understanding of serving side and
even I I'll remember I never forget this
it was an Instagram DM and this lady was
saying that she was eating 1600 calories
a day and not losing weight and we kind
of you know had a little back and forth
and we were talking and I said well how
she's like I am measuring my food I'm
like how are you measuring it she's like
I'm I'm doing volume measurements so she
was doing cups tablespoons that sort of
thing I said do me a
favor do do exactly what you've been
doing but weigh out each one a day later
she came back and said oh my God I'm
eating 2700 calories a day and so even
dietitians under report their caloric
intake in Studies by about 10% and these
are the experts right so you have on one
side people are eating more than they
think they are and then on the other
side they think they're being more
active than they really
are but again that's a hard conversation
to have with people and even as such
telling people hey you need to move more
eat less mechanistically that's true but
that's like telling somebody hey if you
want to save more money just earn more
and spend less with all of this you know
I I was adding up all these
discrepancies right discrepancies is in
like you're weighing it wrong the labels
got 20% wrong and I and then my head
went back to your budgeting analogy as
an entreer as a CEO if my accounting was
20% off I'm dead but if my but but then
if it's 95% off in the till like how
much money we're getting into the till
and then I'm using a cup instead of a
scale so that's I don't know 30% off as
well no wonder you know the business
would go bust right it's complicated I
go what the [__] are you going to do
yeah it it is complicated but I will
tell people you know again if you get
back to the the basics of monitoring
your body weight consistently which is
one of the I have to be careful about
this because there are some people where
monitoring their body weight
consistently ends up being like really
anxiety provoking for them disorted eing
and stuff yeah that sort of thing so
that's you know I try to be sensitive to
that but it is a consistent thing in the
literature that people who lose weight
and keep it off tend to monitor their
body weight pretty regularly and it's
it's a self-correcting thing right like
if you're keeping a budget very
regularly and you see oh man I spent you
know $5,000 more this month what happens
you correct right and so I would use
that more instead of the accounting
variation I would say well sometimes
your business has unexpected expenses
right or sometimes you have less
expenses right and so those are going to
fluctuate and can be hard to anticipate
right and so what we're looking for
overall is okay let's look back at you
know I think a lot of businesses operate
in quarters right let's look at this
quarter okay on average here's here's
our month over month what we're
profiting right okay well we can start
to budget based on these sorts of things
and expectations we'll try to project
out a little bit I kind of look at that
with people I'm like all right well how
much weight did you lose on average like
over the past month okay how much were
you eating okay you lost six pounds over
the last month you're definitely in a
calorie deficit right it's working keep
going maybe you're eating 2,000 calories
maybe you're eating 2,300 calories who
cares it's working right now what
happens is eventually once you plateau
again maybe reading 2,000 maybe reading
2300 doesn't matter whichever it is if
you've plateaued it means you have to
reestablish the deficit so you either
have to reduce your calories or you have
to increase your activity or a
combination of both you know those sorts
of things what about one thing I you
talk about at the very start of this
conversation was um artificial sweetness
specifically oh yeah let's do that
specifically in things like Diet Coke
I've you know I've wondered for a while
whether Diet Coke is healthy or not okay
and there's a lot of you know people
talking about this at the moment so
what's your answer to that okay this is
going to be the most commented thing
about in this entire interview I'm sure
go um okay so first off let's just talk
about weight loss and fat loss okay and
and leave out the other stuff um if you
look at the
epidemiology and the cohort studies you
tend to see that people who consume more
artificial sweeteners or diet soda are
heavier in body weight and so some
people have said these things cause
weight
gain but the problem with that is again
lifestyle behaviors and so one of the
things they've shown is that people who
consume more artificial sweeteners
actually tended to be more overweight to
start with obese to start with
they didn't cause them to become that
way they're consuming more of them
because they're trying to get to a less
obese state right so there's a
correlation there but if we look at the
randomized control trials right where
they say hey you're used to you guys
drink soda regular soda you guys drink
diet soda there was actually one that
just got published a very very really
rigorously controlled one-ear
study way more weight loss in the diet
soda group
um and I'm thinking of another
randomized control trial I think it was
six months where they saw like 6
kilograms of weight loss just from
switching people from regular soda to
diet soda or it might not have been soda
specifically they call them sugar
sweetened beverages versus you know
non-nutritive sweetened beverages um so
when you replace for for soda it seems
to be very effective uh all things being
equal and people will say Well it you
know it activates the the sweetness in
the and and you get hungrier from
it well if that's the case then these
studies would suggest that artificial
sweeteners are actually the best frat
burners known to man because if people
are eating more and still losing six
kilograms that's amazing they're not
it's they're not fat burners they
they're replacing that sweet taste and
then people will say well it's not
better than water you know water people
should just drink water shoot the
alligator closest to the boat right like
okay hey if you can drink water and just
drink water cool do that right but if
somebody can lose and I have people all
the time when I do a post about this
somebody say I lost 30 40 50 lbs all I
did was stop drinking regular soda and
drink diet soda literally the only
change they made in their
life now when they compare it versus
water they either see the same results
or the diet soda group gets a little bit
better results and yeah now it's not
because of any kind of fat burning
effect
what is likely is when somebody switches
from regular sugar sweetened beverage to
water they may try to fill that gap of
that sweet taste somewhere else whereas
if they're just consuming the
artificially sweeten or non-nutritive
sweeten but we can't say artificial
because um like Stevia is actually you
know natural so to say so they call it
nonnutritive sweeteners but if they're
consuming the the non-nutritive
sweeteners they're filling that Gap
compensation again compensating right so
now again there's nothing magic about
them people are just eating less right
and if you can do that with water you
don't have to consume diet soda you know
I would say drink water but if you're
somebody where man you know you really
have a hard time quitting regular soda
heck yeah drinking diet soda is a lot
better and people will go well what
about insulin they raise insulin that is
actually one of the biggest myths out
there there are multiple not just iies
but now I'm pretty sure there's a meta
analysis as well that shows that these
artificial sweeteners do not raise
insulin there is one
study um I'm thinking specifically about
sucralose there's one study and there
everybody always hangs their hats on
this and I love to to break it down
where sucralose did not increase insulin
but they did a they did a sucrose group
a carbohydrate only group and a
carbohydrate plus sucrose group and the
results were the carbohydrate plus
sucralose group secreted more insulin
than the carbohydrate only group even
though they ate the same amount of carbs
and so people go well see maybe it's not
bad but if you're you know drinking it
with carbohydrates it's bad and this is
where reading the full text and really
going deep on a study is very important
so the carbohydrate only group was
sucrose which is 50% glucose 50%
fructose the carb hydrate plus sucralose
group was
maltodextrin maltodextrin if you look at
are you familiar with glycemic index
Loosely yeah so glycemic index basically
looks at like um you know how quickly
glucose appears in your system and
usually you can kind of correlate the
insulin response to
that multitran has a significantly
higher glycemic index and causes a
greater insulin response than
sucrose because it is a it's actually
causes a greater insulin response than
even glucose itself because um it's kind
of getting into the biochemistry but
because it's like this polymer um it is
actually a little bit more rapidly
digested and absorbed into the
circulation so it was actually an
inappropriate control group to try to
assess that because if you look at the
difference in insulin response it's
about what you'd expect if you just look
at multitran versus
sucrose So based on the research there's
no evidence it affects glycemia or
increases insulin and in fact in these
studies where they you know these
randomized control trials where they
look at you know weight loss um you see
improvements in insulin sensitivity
hba1c you know because people are losing
weight not because of anything magic
with these sweeteners is sugar
addictive this one's going to get me in
trouble too um I want to come back to
the artificial sweeteners but I'll
answer that um Sugar by itself does not
appear to be addtive
Ive there are certain
foods that appear to create what's
called a food dependence there's subtle
differences between that and
addiction but I mean kind of the
anecdote is nobody's like just grabbing
the bag of sucros and just you know
eating that and if you think about the
foods that really are like very hard to
stop eating they're usually not just
high in sugar they're usually it's a
combination of sugar fat salt and
texture okay texture matters as well and
mouth feel people will say well Sugar's
addictive look at cakes cookies ice
cream
there's more calories from fat in those
than there are sugar in a lot of cases
so couldn't you by that logic just argue
that fat is also addictive so
sugar straight sugar doesn't appear to
be addictive per se now it's not very
satiating right and it's utterly devoid
of any other kind of nutrient so I'm not
saying it's a good idea to eat a lot of
sugar but um it doesn't appear to have
addictive qualities in isolation but
there are certain foods cakes cookies
these sorts of foods hyper palatable
very great mouth fuel potato chips
french fries these sorts of foods may
have like s sem addictive type
properties but just sugar itself doesn't
appear to and there's a there's a a
study that kind of backs that up
basically I think the title was like no
evidence for sugar addiction in humans
so people will say well you know when I
eat that piece of chocolate or that you
know sugary thing I end up just eating
more and more and more and more and more
and more and then the next day I I feel
like I need sugar more and I can I've
got my own sort of anecdotal experience
of I almost call it like a sugar cycle
where there might be a weak you know
once every four months or six months
where I have some sugar and then the
next day I want more sugar and then the
next day and then when I break that
Sugar cycle and if I don't eat sugar for
like 5 days it kind of it feels like the
Cravings gone away M you must hear that
from people yeah I mean like right now I
have no urge to have sugar for some
reason yeah it's so hard to disentangle
that from just psychology in general
right and just like it that could be a
self-fulfilling thing where it's like
you know people have been C sugar is
addictive or they've heard sugar is
addictive and so they eat some feel that
mood but also like again the chocolate
usually also high in fat right like the
mouth feels really good so I'm not
saying like that stuff is easy to
overeat on and and people can have a
hard time stopping but it doesn't appear
that Sugar like independently is
addictive but it can be part of foods
that may have addictive like properties
artificial sweeters you said you wanted
to close off there yeah so now let's
talk so we very clearly the research
studies show the ones that are
controlled
well it does help with weight loss um in
a lot of these
studies what about cancer heart disease
uh and the gut microbiome because that's
a lot of the questions are out there so
with cancer a lot of people think oh
there's so many studies showing it
causes cancer well first of all again
we're talking about epidemiology we're
talking about cohort studies so there's
a lot of confounding
variables but so we were talking about
consensus earlier um it's kind of a um
I'm on their scientific Advisory Board
and it's like PubMed plus chat GPT so
you can ask it a question and it will
immediately like crawl all the research
literature and give you a consensus of
what the research says right and so I I
did this and you can synthesize it too
where it'll show you what percentage of
studies say yes no and then possibly
right so I I I think I put in do
artificial sweeteners cause cancer do
you know 80% % of the studies say no but
you don't hear about those and why is
that because it's much more newsworthy
to put out negative news because if you
hear a study this thing doesn't cause
cancer ho right but what gets shared a
lot oh man Aunt Deborah she drinks Diet
Coke Deb have you seen this you know
it's much more sharable so that negative
news tends to get published more
right and if you look at the the human
studies some of the the more well done
ones like I'm think of the neutr Santi
cohort in out of France the conclusion
was oh it increased the risk of cancer
and I I looked in I think it was
aspartame spe
specifically if something's
carcinogenic typically what we see is a
dose response right so if you smoke more
you have a higher risk of lung cancer
did you know that the yes the so they
compared like no or like low amount of
aspartame users to like low moderate and
then High moderate I want to say it was
three different groups so I I could be
butchering this a little bit but think
low medium high
right the medium group had a higher risk
of cancer the High group didn't it
actually like not uh compared to the the
low group it was not statistically
different but it dropped from the
moderate group so to me and again we're
talking about an ratio of like 1.15
meaning a 15% relative risk increase let
me put that in perspective 15% sounds
scary when it comes to cancer but
relative risk means if your absolute
risk of developing cancer and say the
next 10 years is 10% a relative risk
increase of 15% says it goes up to 11.5
yeah it doesn't mean it goes from 10 to
25 right so it's important to to
understand the difference but again if
it's really carcinogenic we should
expect to see kind of a a dose response
right we don't see that so to me that's
especially with all the studies that
don't find an
association that's that's more likely to
be some kind of data artifact with who
knows confounding variables healthy user
bias what have you what about the gut
then so now there are studies showing
that some sweeteners do change the gut
microflora the comp the composition of
it um sucrose appears too aspartame not
so much um I think sacran also showed a
change to the gut
microbiome now here's what's
interesting it's hard to know if that is
a good bad or neutral change in terms of
overall health because um I was looking
through one of the studies on
sucralose and they were talking about
that a couple of species or or genuses
of bacteria that increased and one of
them that increased was actually
associated with people who are leaner
have less obesity and better insulin
sensitivity and also a species that
produce more butyrate and butyrate
actually is associated with a whole Host
this is a a short chain fatty acid
produced by the gut microbiome mate is
associated with a whole host of positive
health benefits so I I I will say it's
worth monitoring because some of these
do appear to change the breakdown of the
got microbiota but there's probably You
could argue just as much that there's a
positive effect as you could a negative
effect so what I'll say is again if we
look back at the again shoot the
alligator closest to the boat and there
are no Solutions only trade-offs if
somebody switches to diet soda even if
it's not the very best thing they could
do maybe water is the very best thing
they could do but if they lose 20
lbs and their hba1c drops and their
insulin s gets better the metabolic
Health gets
better it's probably a worthwhile
tradeoff are there any supplements that
you would recommend everybody to
take so I I always say I have like tears
of supplements right um my my first
tier thousands of research studies very
clearly has benefits creatin monohydrate
um which we've known about the
performance benefits for years we've
known about the um the strength benefits
the body composition benefits you take
it every day yes I do um now it's coming
out that there's cognitive benefits and
I want to say man I hope I don't I hope
I don't get this wrong so I will fact
check this and and make sure you ask me
for the study I'm pretty sure they did a
study that showed that creatin actually
decreased depressive symptoms
interesting so what I will say is if
there was one I would recommend for
everybody it would probably be Crea
monohydrate because it's cheap effective
and um I mean people say wow we don't
know what the long-term effects are it's
been around for like 40 years we if if
there was long-term effects we' we'd
have seen it by now and just to Quick
aside creatin monohydrate don't waste
your money on anything else there's
people try to reinvent the wheel with
creatin because monohydrate it's you
know remember when like big screen flat
screen TVs came out uh this I might be a
I'm my age here no I remember but I
remember it was like $1,000 for a 40in
screen TV and now you can get one for a
stick of bubblegum you know what I mean
and it's because everybody makes them
they're so ubiquitous it drove the cost
down right everybody sells creatin
monohydrate it drives the cost down so
companies come up with new forms of
creatin and make these claims around
them to try to like get you to spend
more money on cre creatin monohydrate
saturates the muscle cell 100% you don't
need to do anything else what's going on
there so a couple things um and we don't
don't fully understand all the
mechanisms but we know that when creatin
gets in the system um and gets into the
cell it bonds with a phosphate which uh
produces creatin phosphate that is a
high energy phosphate donor so when
you're exercising um basically you are
using what's called adenosine
triphosphate which is ATP which is the
purest form of energy in your body so
this what we call hydrolysis of ATP is
used to power a lot of reactions in your
body um and so ATP triphosphate three
phosphates it to power these reactions
it gets cleaved to a DP as anine
diphosphate plus uh an inorganic
phosphate right creatine can donate its
phosphate to ADP reform ATP so what we
see is you know um especially during
anerobic exercise uh better performance
of creatin because it's a high energy
phosphate donor can help replenish that
um and then it also pulls water into the
cell and we think that that's part of
the body composition benefits of it
because um you know a hydrated muscle
cell I mean muscle cells are 70% water
they're mostly water and people say well
it's just water okay but that's lean
tissue and there's actually some I
believe there's some evidence that
actually uh hydrating the muscle
basically actually increases the
improves the contractile properties of
the muscle so that could explain part of
the strength benefits um and of course
again it's going to show up as lean mass
right now it's not a huge effect we're
talking you know couple pounds for most
people something like that I'll take it
but but for a relatively cheap effective
supplement yeah take it right what are
the supplements then in is there
anything else in the tier one yeah uh I
mean like for people who can tolerate
whey protein I mean you know it's not um
it's not magic but it's a cheap uh
usually quite tasty way to get in high
quality protein and you know if you get
it from Whole Food great but a lot of
people struggle to get in you know the
amount of protein they'd like to get in
from Whole Food and so whey protein
again very high quality usually easily
digestible the caveat is whey protein
concentrate a lot of people can't
tolerate it because there's lactose in
there so if you have a lactose uh
intolerance a way isolate which is
usually micr filtered um gets out the
vast majority if not all the lactose and
so most people can tolerate that but
there are a certain percentage of people
who also have a sensitivity to the
lactalbumin in way the the proteins in
way so in that case there's what's
called a way hydrolysate which is
pre-digested way and almost all people
can tolerate that but if you don't have
any digestive issues with it a
concentrator and isolate is totally fine
what else in that tier one and then I
would say uh caffeine interesting CA
caffeine is one of the it is the
original cognitive enhancer if we look
at cognitive test we see consistently
people perform better and if you look at
uh performance people consistently
perform better right before 12 a lot of
people talk to me about the halflife of
caffeine impacting sleep yeah so that I
mean that's the you know there's even
some evidence that you know even if you
have like a good dose of caffeine in the
morning that it may still affect your
sleep later so again no Solutions only
trade-offs right um I would say overall
if you are an
athlete um or somebody who you know
relies heavily on your brain power to
you know do whatever it is you
do caffeine probably a useful supplement
as you said you know if you're going to
take it try to get in you know nine
hours before you're going to sleep to
cease your caffeine intake because um by
that time you know the majority of it is
out of your system right what are the
big misconceptions about intermittent
fasting it it seems to be a really great
tool for a lot of people to be able to
control their their calorie intake um in
studies where they don't prescribe
calories so they they don't match
calories they just tell people either
intermittent fast or you know follow a
diet people in the intermittent fasting
groups tend to lose more weight and have
better improvements in their blood
markers but it's not because of anything
magic about intermittent fasting it's
because it's placing them in a calorie
deficit do they see that in the studies
that when they when they do like
randomized control trials where they're
they're actually controlling calories
I'm like one great extreme version of
that would be uh there was a study on
Alternate day fasting right so people
would do um one day fast complete fast
the next day um eat 150% of their
maintenance calories whereas the group
that was just doing continuous was doing
75% of their maintenance calories the
entire time both groups lost pretty much
the same amount of weight and actually
the The Continuous group retained a
little bit more lean mass and lost a
little bit more fat Mass but you know
that's a pretty extreme form of fasting
if you look at the like the more
traditional like 168 or those sorts of
intermittent
fasting you see pretty much the same
retention of lean mass compared to just
continuous kind of eating programs the
the myths that really get tossed around
are a lot of them around longevity um
and people saying well cuz whenever I
talk about this people will say well I
don't I don't fast for weight loss I I
fast for health I fast for longevity and
aagy you probably heard this this term
so what I'll tell you is there's
actually more evidence that uh calorie
restriction increases autophagy than
intermittent fasting but intermittent
fasting or fasting does increase
autophagy so let's talk about what what
this is so autophagy is a type of
basically Lal protein breakdown so
there's a few different ways that the
body breaks down like old misfolded
proteins or just things that need to be
turned over one of them is um through
this kind of Lal protein degradation
which the lome is a is a organel in the
cell that can kind of engulf these old
proteins and break them down and then
you get the amino acids from those
proteins that can then be recycled to
make new proteins right calorie
restriction increases autophagy exercise
increases autophagy fast can increase
autophagy too but you'll hear people say
well you got to fast for X period of
time CU it's when autophagy turns on
like 3 days or something 72 hours or
something not true so this this is
autophagy protein breakdown is always
occurring regardless it's the relative
rate that changes right but there's no
evidence that fasting increases
autophagy more than eating the same
amount of calories just spread out over
time now let me give you an example
right let's say somebody fasts for 20
hours out of the day and they eat for 4
hours
right and and again the the example I'm
using is because some people will say
well I don't do it for weight loss I do
it for you know just health benefits so
let's say over that day they're eating
their maintenance level of calories
you're just eating in a 4-Hour period
right whereas let's say ex person just
eats three four meals and same amount of
calories during the fasting period sure
your autophagy is is going to your
rate's going to go up but then during
that 4 hours when you're eating you're
having to eat a lot more food during
that 4 hours gu what's going to happen
it's going to go way down so while the
your rate of autophagy may be lower
eating continuously throughout the day
compared to the time when people are
fasting when those people when the FAS
start eating in that window whatever it
is since they have to eat more during
that time autophagy drop drops whereas
the people eating continuously their
autophagy is now a higher rate what if
you what if you're going through some
kind of disease or some kind of
inflammation or whatever is there a use
for intermittent longer term fasting in
that context so say if I was I don't
know if I had some inflamation or there
was you know something wrong with me is
there ever a use case for sort of 702
hour fasts that will hold me I guess in
a greater um depth of autophagy this is
difficult because there's not really
direct research looking at this so I I
what I will say will be speculation um
and I'm comfortable speculating on it
again let's just break it down to
equating weekly calories right
because if we're comparing Apples to
Apples right we we have the we know
caloric restriction will increase
autophagy so if intermittent fasting
places somebody in a calorie deficit
overall that's what we call a
confounding variable right so if we
assume over the course of a week two
people assume genetically identical
right eating the same amount of calories
but somebody is eating them in 4 days
whereas the other person's just
spreading them across seven but the
person eating them in four days is
fasting for three days well their rate
of autophagy and fat oxidation is going
to be much higher during those three
days right but then when they've got to
fit all the calories they normally would
in mhm over those four days now it's
going to be much lower and the people
eating continuously are going to have a
higher rate of autophagy and fat fat
oxidation body's smart it it it strives
for homeostasis now I'll have some
people say Devil's Advocate argument is
well what if you're not compensating for
the calories during those four days well
then now you're in a calorie deficit and
you can't disentangle the effects from
the calorie deficit right so in what
I'll say is in the tightly controlled
randomized control trials that we have
where they equate calories between uh
inter fasting groups versus not fasting
groups we don't see differences in
weight loss
and we don't really see much difference
in biomarkers of Health
hba1c markers of insulin sensitivity you
have some studies where you'll see like
a little bit lower fasting blood glucose
with intermittent fasting when they test
it but I think this is an artifact of
the way they test it is it okay if I get
kind of like deep into the Weeds on this
one go ahead um so one of the problems
is if you're going to compare apples to
apples if you fast for longer your
fasting blood glucose will be a little
bit lower if somebody's eating
continuously for
example
um and then they're fasting for say 12
hours before the test but the person in
the fasting group has fasted for now 16
hours because they were in a defined
eating window their blood glucose tests
out maybe a little bit lower right and
so you see this in some of the studies
not all but some of them but then you
look at the longer term markers of
insulin sensitivity like a
hba1c and you don't typically see
differences when they're equating
calories and so again again I'm not
people will hear what I'm saying and
and it's always like the filter right
what I'm actually saying and what they
hear is Lane said intermittent fasting
sucks and it's worthless no if it is
something that you can be consistent
with and it helps you control your
intake it is a fabulous way for a lot of
people to control their calorie intake
and lose weight here's a question for
you and um H me I think I know the
answer but it but it turns out a lot of
people don't know the answer because I
was doing some research ahead of time
about the types of things people
struggle with are interested in and I
actually did some research into what
people are Googling the most and it's
interesting that people are Googling the
most when it comes to weight loss can
you guess what it
is ketogenic diet well even more than
that is how to lose belly fat oh
interesting and it's not so that people
are really really obsessed with losing
this fat right here and I think there's
some exercises out there and some diets
that purport to be able to help you lose
just targeted fat in this region what'
you say to that the answer is you may be
able to spot
reduce
but I think practically it's kind of
irrelevant and I'll explain why so first
of all the question is is that visceral
or liver fat or is that just where you
tend to store subcutaneous fat and
that's hard to know unless somebody's
done like a you know an MRI and that
sort of thing because some people just
store their their subcutaneous fat in
different areas right like uh some
people tend to have it more in their
legs like women in particular they if
they store it they tend to store more in
their legs whereas men tend to store it
more here what's the difference between
subcutaneous and visceral so visceral is
the viscera around the organs okay um
visceral fat and liver fat are gram for
gram far more metabolically unhealthy
than subcutaneous fat okay so that's
that's the point of
differentiation but the stuff that
causes you to lose subc fat which is the
fat Under the Skin um is the same stuff
that typically helps you lose liver fat
or visceral fat so one of the things I
tell people if we're if we're talking
about trying to lose body fat or trying
to get any big Health outcome let's pick
up if we're going to try and make up as
much in weight of Boulders as we can
you're going to focus on the big rocks
first right and then if you got the big
rocks you can worry about picking up
some Pebbles but don't drop the big
rocks to pick up the Pebbles I think a
lot of people end up doing that so
before you go into some very specific
protocol on trying to lose you know
belly
fat go back zoom out can I sustain this
long term because if you can't sustain
it long term it's it's not really going
to matter you're better off finding
something that you can sustainably do
consistently execute long term because
if you lose enough overall body fat
eventually you will lose the belly fat
and I mean you know
part of it is just our genetics and how
we store it seems really stubborn though
it seems like for me it feels like it's
the last thing to go I will say they've
shown that exercise specifically can
help Target liver and visceral fat uh to
even without a calorie deficit so even
if people maintain their body weight
they tend to lose liver and visceral fat
just through exercise so let's talk
about exercise and weight loss ah so hot
topic Hot Topic very hot topic I I would
love an answer here on you know one
school of thought is that exercise isn't
particularly useful for weight loss
because if I go out for a run I then
come home and I just eat more um and
there's a this is kind of a multifaceted
issue in the sense that there's a
biochemical component to that hypothesis
I.E my brain produces more of the hunger
hormone so I get more hungry but then
there's also a psychological um part to
that hypothesis where people say it's
actually because I went for a run so I
think I deserve more food so then I eat
more cake because I feel good about
myself so this is where the way the
study is conducted really
matters so let's take it mechanistically
first if we look at tightly controlled
studies where they have people exercise
and they're having them you know eat the
same amount of calories verus people
don't exercise absolutely helps with
weight loss
absolutely the hunger side is a little
more complex so first off there's a
compensation
of exercise
where uh Herman poner did this research
basically showing that if you burn 100
calories from
activity you don't net 100 calories of
loss your body actually compensates by
your BMR reducing a little bit or uh you
become spontan maybe a little bit less
spontaneously active right so there's a
a partial compensation but on average
again everybody's different but on
average uh it's about 28 calories per
100 calories so if you do 100 calories
of activity you're still netting 72 it's
just not as much as you thought you were
going to get right so there's that
aspect to it that that exercise doesn't
cause the amount of weight loss that you
might predict based on how much you do
right but it still contributes to energy
expenditure the more interesting thing
is what you touched on which is intake
which is actually counterintuitive to
what you think on average in the studies
um yes people tend to eat a little bit
more but the compensation is not nearly
complete okay so PE exercise on the net
actually has an anorectic effect now I'm
not saying for every person there are
some people who whether it's
psychological or it actually is
physiological they exercise more and
they they do feel more hunger right but
on average in the studies exercise
either has a neutral or positive effect
on appetite and there actually is one
classic stud study from the 1950s I
referenced it in the book where they
looked at Bengali workers and they
didn't have an intervention but they
just looked at sedentary lightly active
moderately
active very heavily active right so
think heavy construction labor
workers and from lightly active to
heavily active they almost perfectly
compensated their energy intake right by
eating more by by eating more to match
the activity right just intuitively the
sedentary people ate more than the
lightly active and if I recall correctly
about the same maybe a little bit more
than the moderately active
folks being sedentary actually
disregulated your appetite when you are
active it actually sensitizes you to
your body's own satiety signals they
work
better so I actually think the main
benefit of exercise for weight loss
isn't because you burn so many calories
it's one because exercise helps with
lean mass retention which we know that
the more lean mass you have higher
energy expenditure and it also helps
prevent weight regain so that's one
aspect but the actual amount of calories
you expend in exercise I mean if you
look at the actual research literature
it's not that much I mean you go to the
gym for two hours you might burn 500
calories something like that half my
salad right right right like you could
you eat a doughnut boom gone
right but people tend to have better
appetite Reg regulation when they
exercise when they're active there
there's a there's multiple components to
it um like I said better sensitivity
satiety signals but then the
psychological aspect of goes the other
way there are some people who say well
I'm exercising I'm going to eat this but
other people exercise and they actually
all their habits start to get better I'm
I'm one of those people as well right I
always say if I want to fix my diet I
need to go to the gym right I always say
that because when I I don't I said it to
I think some of my friends in my team
the other day if I'm going to go and
work out for an hour and I'm going to do
go do a hit workout for an hour for
example it's so painful that the last
thing I want to do is throw it all away
with like a [__] Crispy Cream so I I
sudden my diet then Falls in place
suddenly and that's always when I
whenever I go through a moment in my
life where I'm like Steve you've lost
control of your diet here it's how can I
get myself to the gym as as the Catalyst
to you know get my diet in order and
that's so that's the problem with a lot
of not the problem but just the
limitation of a lot of studies which is
you know especially like epidemiology
when I say epidemiology it's like this
group does this this group does this and
we're looking at what other things
happen yeah well people don't do things
in isolation right so you you'll hear a
study like
um I'm I'm thinking of something um oh
um people who eat more protein have
higher rates of
this okay well if we look at where most
people get their protein sources in the
western world it's highly processed
energy-dense foods protein tends to just
be a proxy for overall more calories and
so is it the protein or is it all the
calories they're taking in right and
again people
their Lifestyles and habits tend to go
together right like you he X group was
more prone to heart disease
but then they also tend to smoke more
drink more alcohol like the these it is
very difficult to disconnect those those
habits and those lifestyle habits right
they call it um healthy user bias and
studies it's one of it's one of the
things we have difficulty with and
that's why you know again human
randomized control trials are kind of
our gold standard because I think this
is important to touch on the word
randomized okay so if we're talking
about epidemiology or cohort studies so
cohort is a little bit better than your
standard epidemiology because they're
taking groups of people and they're
following them for years so each person
is kind of their own control right but
still people tend to who are more
healthy tend to do more overall healthy
things people who are more unhealthy
tend to do more it's hard to disconnect
those two but when you do a study and
you say okay you know one group is going
to do a low carb diet one group is going
to do a low fat diet and we're going to
randomize them
right why is that important well what if
we let people self- select okay well if
they just say go whichever group you
want well and I I'm just speculating
right but for example low carb diet's
very hot right now a lot of people may
have a very strong civity to go to that
group thinking it's healthier having a
more positive view point of it and they
may clean up a lot more other aspects of
their life but if we randomize what we
can assume through that randomization
process is that any inherent
characteristics of the subjects are
going to be equally distributed amongst
the groups and that is why that's so
important and I remember I was I was
listening to um a breakdown on a podcast
one time and and they were discussing a
study that was looking at um they were
looking at intermittent fasting versus
continuous energy restriction so just
normal dieting and and basically the the
Crux of the study was they found no real
difference in weight loss and the person
on there was a very pro- intermittent
fasting person they said well how you
know they don't know maybe the one group
was eating a bunch of junk food or
whatever and I'm thinking
this person doesn't understand
randomization right like you you that
would be a very odd thing to just it
actually would lead you to the
conclusion that intermittent fasting
might cause you to seek out junk food
right so again randomization is not
perfect but the reason it's so important
is because it helps us get rid of that
healthy user bias and um I think again
if people but the downside to randomize
control trials is you can only run them
for so long because they're controlled
is your view on keto the same as you've
kind of said about all diets or does
keto stand in a buet of its own and I
asked this in part because a lot of
doctors kind of prescribe keto as a diet
for certain people that have um epilepsy
and certain types of inflammation and
brain related issues okay so epilepsy is
a specific case essentially for epilepsy
ketogenic diet is actually a very um
effective treatment it provides a usable
substrate ketones for the brain and they
see it um decrease the incidence of
epilepsy in fact my friend that I
referenced Dom d austino he actually
started studying the ketogenic diet as
for um deep water Navy SEAL divers
because a lot of those divers at depth
get seizures and they found that doing
the ketogenic diet helped reduce those
seizures now
unfortunately people have taken that to
say well any brain problem just give
them the keto diet there's way less
evidence to support it for other brain
problems but let's let's talk about
there's a lot of claims around the keto
diet low carb diets it seems to function
for fat loss the same way as other diets
through a calorie deficit there was a
there have been several really well done
randomized control trials as well as a
couple of metaanalyses now if they
compare diets that are equal in calories
and protein but vary the carbohydrate
and fat amount anywhere from low fat
high carb
to low carb high
fat no real differences in weight loss
or fat loss in fact it actually the
metanalysis showed it slightly favored
um lowfat diets but it was a really like
non-clinically significant
amount but how can that be because one
of the things people say well when you
do a keto diet you burn way more fat so
this is I think if there's one sound
bite that might you know make it this
might be it so yes you do burn more fat
on a on a ketogenic diet why well when
you do a ketogenic diet you're eating
higher fat lower carb so you're eating
more fat you have more fat substrate to
burn but also you're keeping insulin low
and so you burn uh more fat because
insulin reduces your rate of fat
oxidation and reduces lipolysis so
people take that and they go well it's
better right so here's where we're
getting into we were talking earlier
about mechanisms versus outcomes right
but when we look at these studies so
they actually measure the outcome of fat
loss they don't see differences between
low carb and low fat how if they're
burning this much more fat fat loss and
fat burning or fat oxidation are not the
same thing fat oxidation is part of fat
loss but it's only one side of the coin
so fat fat whether you lose or gain fat
is fat balance you are always storing
and burning fat fat simultaneously okay
on a low
carb high fat diet you are burning a lot
of fat but you're also storing a lot of
fat and here's why carbohydrate really
isn't stored as body fat your body
almost exclusively has to burn it when
you take it in there was a trace they
did a metabolic Tracer study where they
basically labeled carbohydrates and fats
you can label them with a stable isotope
and you look at where the label winds up
right less than 2% of the fat stored in
adapost in a mixed diet originated as
carbohydrate what's atopos uh fat cells
okay over 98% came from dietary fat so
here's the rub if you are doing a lowfat
high carb diet you're not burning much
fat but you're not storing much fat
either if you're doing a low
carb high fat diet you're burning a lot
of fat but you're also storing a lot of
fat so what actually matters in terms of
fat balance is energy balance are you
eating more calories than you're burning
that is what will end up dictating that
and that's why we just don't see
differences in actual loss of body fat
between those groups but again so this
is where we got into earlier before we
started the cameras a lot of people get
very focused on these biochemical
mechanisms and one of the things
I was that way when I was a undergrad in
Biochemistry and I think doing that
first was great doing biochemistry first
was great and then going to nutrition
and having a good adviser who zoomed me
out and said hey you're you're pretty
far in the weeds Zoom back out look at
the whole picture okay
because mechanisms are great it's good
to ask questions and it when we see an
outcome and when I say outcome fat loss
would be an outcome actual loss of body
fat uh a change in HBA 1 C A biomarker
that's an outcome right if there's an
outcome there will be a mechanism to
support that outcome but just because
there's a mechanism doesn't mean there's
an outcome and what I mean by that is
all these biochemical Pathways these
mechanisms this is a symphony and when
you do one thing someplace a lot of
times it's compensated someplace else
okay an outcome is the summation of
hundreds if not thousands of different
biochemical Pathways coming together and
the example I used with you earlier was
getting focused on mechanisms is like
looking at a mutual fund and getting
focused on the individual stocks in it
right and saying woo don't invest in
that mutual fund look at those two
stocks that are down by
40% but why do I care if the overall
mutual funds up by 20% I care about the
overall that's the outcome and so I'm
not against necessarily looking at
mechanisms but I'm always going to go to
first okay do we actually have human
trials that are measuring the thing that
we care about not a proxy measure but
the actual thing and if I can invoke a
former episode on here if that's okay
you know somebody said well be careful
drinking caffeine because it stimulates
cortisol release and that can cause you
to store belly fat so that's a mechanism
right if you look at the actual outcome
data in terms of body fat and um
visceral fat or liver fat with caffeine
you actually see a neutral positive
effect so okay maybe that in small
increase in cortisol maybe that's okay
that's a negative but if caffeine's also
stimulating your BMR and also possibly
doing some other things like increasing
fat
oxidation okay maybe there is that
negative component to it but it's
obviously outweighed by the positive
components that end up in the outcome
that we're looking at right so without
being scientists and being able to um
understand all of the little instruments
in the orchestra yeah right because
that's what we try and do sometimes we
try and figure out all the little
instruments in the orchestra but really
you're saying listen to the music listen
to the music
and listening to the music in that
analogy would be like looking at the
scales or would be just looking looking
for the outcomes the outcome I mean and
also I guess one one thing more would be
this point about consistency and
sustainability because like we all have
a bias to
one big rewards for small investment and
that sells right five minute abs that's
what we want complete physique overhaul
in six weeks add an inch to your arms in
12 weeks what I'm really fascinated by
Is What It Takes at a psychology level
and we kind of talked about it already
because we talked about your why and all
these things but you can say that you
can say to someone like me in business
it's going to take you 10 years to get
get there or it's going to take you 10
years to become the world record holder
in this uh powerlifting activity but for
someone to say yep fine they're going to
have to be a little bit their I say
twisted they're GNA have to be a little
bit it is the ability I think one of the
most underrated things is the ability to
delay gratification right and not in all
areas of my life but in that particular
area I'm really good at it and I wonder
how much of a choice you had at a deep
level you know it's interesting I so I
told the story of how squatting was hard
for me I the I had been training hard
for three years and I had like these
chicken legs I used to get made fun of
on the bodybuilding Forum so bad and I
remembered thinking three four years in
I'm like man people was like dude your
genetics suck like why why are you going
to keep doing this and it's kind of the
let's find out thing I
remember literally having this internal
dialogue of you know maybe they never
will be
big but I'm going to I'm going to commit
myself to training hard consistently for
10 years and if I haven't if I don't
have a decent set of legs at that time
then I'll allow myself to quit if I
still feel that way and I always say
paralysis by analysis and perfectionism
has killed more dreams than failure ever
could because one of the the one of the
worst things you can do is have no
action in action is way worse than
failure because if you fail at least you
can learn something from it you try
stuff you I'm sure as an entrepreneur
you've had a lot of stuff fail right but
you learn from that and you go okay well
that didn't work well try this and
eventually if you're trying enough stuff
and you're walking the path it may not
have worked out the way you drew it up
but you get something better than what
you started with right maybe not exactly
what you wanted maybe you get something
better though and I'll tell people
that's why
action is so much more important than
trying to get everything laid out
perfectly just start where you are right
now as imperfect as it is start walking
the path and if you are walking the path
you're going to screw
up learn from it and do better the next
time and
eventually again maybe you don't get
exactly what you want but I bet you get
something pretty good I got really
obsessed with the idea of failure um
because of business because I I take
stock on the things that move me forward
the most the things that were most
course correcting and it was never an
Accolade or an achievement it was always
when life says you were wrong about that
and um from that I have this really
clear phrase in mind that failure is
feedback feedback is knowledge and
knowledge is your power and I then went
on to study Jeff Bezos Amazon and
booking.com and Thomas uh Watson who was
the richest man on Earth at one point he
was the um founder and CEO IBM and
through all of their writing they are
absolutely obsessed with increasing
their failure rate so much so Thomas
Watson was once asked in an interview
after one of his employees had failed at
something that cost the company I think
$400 or $600,000 he said are you going
to fire him he goes bu him I've just
spent $400,000 training him and then
when I looked at amon's shareholder
letter it said the same it says we have
Jeff Bezos wrote we have to be the best
place on Earth to fail he goes on to say
in life like it's not about affecting
that perfect swing it's how much you
swing because in the case of Amazon
you'll never know about endless.com
which is in the graveyard or the firep
phone which is in the graveyard or um
a9.com which is in the graveyard but you
know AWS which will make them 70 billion
a year so he goes on to basically say in
he uses a baseball analogy where he goes
in baseball you swing you get a great
hit you might get four run but in life
you swing and you get a great hit you
can just absolutely change your life so
it's really about making sure you're
swinging yeah I mean Kobe Bryant said I
love this quote and I might butcher it a
little bit but he said you know whether
you win or
lose if you win it's great but you still
got to wake up the next day and do the
process over again if you lose it sucks
you still got to get up and do the same
process over again and it's
that willingness to somebody said
confidence is the willingness to wade
into uncertainty and I really like that
quote because I mean that's at the
foundation of kind of like any big goal
that you're going after there is no
certainty you can't guarantee anything
in life and so we can say it's important
to fail it's but when you're actually in
that moment you're not like yes this
failure is great I love this it's it's
very stressful and it sucks like it
really really sucks
but I can tell you in most cases the
best stuff in my life came out of some
of the worst stuff in my life you know
and if I hadn't been willing to
try and Wade back into
it
repeatedly I might not have gotten some
of the great things that have have
happened in life
and whether you win or lose you're still
going to have to wake up and do the
process over but if you stop doing the
process if you stop stop trying if you
stop walking the
path that's where you really lose I
think a lot of this like getting back to
the diet stuff a lot of this the the
diet hacks and stuff like that it's it's
people trying to shortcut that that
painful process but that process is
where you are going to learn so much
about yourself and where the actual
fulfillment is so that kind of brings me
on to a zenek okay because obviously
that's a big subject at the moment with
dieting which is we're talking about you
know quote unquote shortcuts here what's
your opinion on his imp okay I think I'm
going to give a a very balanced view of
this okay
um overall I think it's a net positive
and here's why
so go 100 years back 200 years back
whatever very rarely did you see an
obese person right it was just we didn't
have such crazy access to hyper pable
extremely energy-dense Foods right even
go back 60 years right if you wanted a
cake or a cookie you had to go to the
bakery there was barriers to get there
now we are
surrounded
247 with unlimited access to cheap
calorie dense hyper palatable foods and
again we know people who tend to become
more obese um have a greater reward
response to food here's the real tough
part and where you can tie it back to
addiction right so imagine you were a uh
a gambling addict and I said well we
don't want you to gamble so much but you
got to gamble a couple times a
day uh we don't want you to drink so
much but you got to drink a couple times
a day you know don't do blow so much but
you got to do it a couple times a day
now I mean again people argue about food
addiction is there really food addiction
is there not but imagine being somebody
who struggles with appetite
regulation but knowing you have to eat
you can't just not eat right so I think
if we look at the actual data on on OIC
G what we're talking about just to give
the background biochemistry are glp1
mimics glp1 is a hormone that's secreted
by your gut in response to feeding and
it acts on the GI to tell you you're
full and it also acts on your brain to
tell you to that you're full to decrease
your appetite and these things work very
well um we see a on average about a 15
to 20% reduction in body weight in the
studies so pretty much the most
effective anti-obesity treatment that's
ever been created now glp1 itself is its
halflife is only a couple minutes but
what they've done is they modified the
protein uh so that now the halflife is
much much longer so it has the
opportunity to act on the brain and the
gut for a much longer period of time and
again very effective so what are the
potential downsides what does that do to
the body then so that they've extended
the sort of halflife of the protein and
then that means that I feel satiated for
longer oh yeah so um I don't feel hungry
yeah in fact it can be such a powerful
effect a lot of people it feels like
almost nause ating like
um you you hear again every drug has
side effects right um some people
initially get nausea vomiting that sort
of thing it tends to decrease with time
um but on an anecdotal level I've talked
to people who've done the drug and
they've said that some have said even
after they
stopped the best way they described it
is I don't have the food noise anymore
I'm not all always thinking about food
or I'm not thinking about food nearly as
much it calmed it down for me even after
they had stoed for some people even
after they stopped okay so perhaps
there's some long-term changes to the
brain chemistry that happened we're not
sure or perhaps they just got more
confident because they lost some weight
and realized because it's not increasing
your metabolism that that's one thing to
point out so I've had some people say
you know I have a slow metabolism so
I've got to take OIC and I'm like well
you're going to be disappointed because
it's acting on the appetite side of
things it so some people will say
well the The Devil's Advocate Army is
well they could just eat
less right but if it was that easy
people would just be doing it right so
some of the criticisms of the drug are
well we see a lot of lean mass loss I
don't know if you've heard that some
people said MUSC
muscle I I I don't think that's as much
of a concern as some people do and the
reason is most of these studies with uh
gp1 mimics the people aren't resistance
training and so if you look at studies
where
people aren't resistance training and
they just diet and they're not like
their normal protein not high protein
you see anywhere from like
a like a 30% to 40% of the weight they
lose is from lean mass um and OIC is
it's right about in that area which
makes sense cuz they're eating less and
if they're not resistant training or
eating high protein again they're
feeling very full so hard to eat high
protein because protein tends to be
quite satiating so I don't see that as
being like more necessarily at risk for
lean mass loss I think what I would say
that could be problematic is if people
are so full they may not be choosing the
healthful most healthful food choices
because they feel full if they just end
up eating less of the foods they
normally eat these calorie dense
hyperpalatable foods and they don't
modify their habits when they get off of
it they may be prone to regain and so I
I look at this as I I am if I have to
pick I'm Pro on board with these um just
say it should be done in conjunction
with nutritional counseling and
lifestyle modification right like
encouraging people to exercise educating
them on healthy food choices then I
think it's a great option for a lot of
people do you think there's enough data
especially when we think about sort of
long-term studies on the impact of a
zemp because I you know one of the
things I've come to believe in life is
that there's no such thing as a free
lunch and this sounds too much like a
free lunch to me right now you know so
here here here's what I'll say um we
don't have I mean long-term 10 20 year
data you know some people said well
there's a risk of thyroid cancer I mean
I think that was from like some kind of
rodent study where they were using a
much higher dose than normal um I'm
always I tell people be very careful
less than 50% of animal studies end up
translating into like actual human out
comes what did we say earlier there's no
Solutions there's only tradeoffs yeah
yeah so maybe there is some side effect
some Downstream effect that may have a
negative effect if it helps somebody
lose 50 100 pounds I'm still going to
bet that it's a net positive right could
have it have been better if they did it
through diet and exercise alone maybe
but most of those people weren't going
to get there anyway or it's was going to
be really really tough for them to get
there it's funny CU a lot of Fitness
industry people are very very much
against this drug and then they tell you
what fat burner you can buy with the
discount code in their bio and I'm like
wait wait uh this math doesn't math to
me so your fat burner that probably
doesn't work okay this drug that
actually works not okay make it make
sense what you think of the fitness
industry um I have a LoveHate with it
the big problem with the fitness
industry is a couple things first say
there's really no barrier to entry right
like if you want to be a medical
professional there's some barriers to
entry right like you got to do some
work anybody can call themselves a
fitness coach there's no barrier at all
and anybody who has a six-pack will get
a lot of clients because as as I found
out um science is way less sexy than
just hey look you know and you know it's
funny I I for a couple years I went up a
weight class in powerlifting I went up
to the 105 kilogram class which is 231
now I'm not I'm not fat at 231 but I I
put it on here quickly right my face
will get pretty in fact there's a reason
there's a nice beard here because it's
like makeup for men right like it it
hides my chubby cheeks and um man the
comments on my videos and I actually saw
I sold less stuff and then when I
dropped back down at powerlifting and I
was leaner I sold more stuff and I'm
like this is so weird like my knowledge
isn't any different it's the same dude
and it's not like when I was 231 that
was on purpose I I didn't get there by
accident wasn't like I forgot how to do
nutrition you know but if you were a
normal person and you didn't know
anything about Fitness and there was two
PTs in front of you you you go to the
one that looks better you go to the one
you want say I want to look like that
right and uh that's that's tough it's a
it's a very tough thing to Wade through
and and what I will say people ask me
all the time do you think a personal
trainer needs to look the part do you
think you know a medical professional
needs to look the part I say no but
people like to see application and I do
think there is value in being able to
tell one of the things I was able to
tell my clients from competing and
bodybuilding and powerlifting and doing
all these hard things I say hey I'll
I'll never ask you to do anything I have
not done or would not be willing to do
myself right and we we said earlier that
humans aren't logical they're emotional
irrational and all these things and we
to conserve mental energy I mean funny
enough I read about this rat study
um I don't hate rat studies most of my
research was in rats but it just it just
goes to show how the brain works and
they put a rat into a maze and put
chocolate at the end of it the first
time it goes through the maze the rat's
brain is going crazy second time it goes
through the same maze its brain is
basically there's like almost no
activity there it's the activity has
dropped and it's turned into autopilot
the study goes on to talk about how
we're always looking for shortcuts to to
decisions what I would tell people
is again you can never turn your brain
off right
and it's it's just hard it's hard to
identify who knows what they're talking
about I mean you know I'll be on this
podcast and then you know people say
what about this guy this guy has a a
doctorate he has this and and um you
know that's one of the reason I actually
started my research review where I
review studies or me and my team review
studies every month and try to like
translate it into plain language because
I did see this like kind of Gap right
and trying to build this bridge because
it's so hard for for the average person
to know and one of the things actually I
I I missed talking about was if you and
I are having a conversation if we're on
a certain topic it becomes clear to both
of us pretty quickly whether or not one
of us is more knowledgeable on the top
topic or where they're about the same
right like pretty quickly can tell like
if we're going into Investments and and
uh how to start a company and marketing
like you're the man for that right comes
to nutrition like you can tell pretty
quickly hopefully I know what I'm
talking about Lifting
me right but what we're really bad at is
if two people are disagreeing on a topic
both of whom are more knowledgeable than
us on said topic we pretty much have no
way to sort out who's who's right or
wrong
wrong okay this is something I've never
mentioned before in 2023 I launched my
very own private Equity Fund called
flight fund and since then we've
invested in some of the most promising
companies in the world my objective is
to make this the best performing Fund in
Europe with a focus on high growth
companies that I believe will be the
next European unicorns the current
investors in the fund who have joined me
on this journey are some of Europe's
most successful and Innovative
entrepreneurs and I'm excited to Ann
anoun that today as a founder of a
company you can pitch your company to us
or if you are an investor you can also
now apply to invest with us head to
flight fund.com to gain an understanding
of the fund's mission the remarkable
companies we proudly support and to get
in touch with me and my team let's talk
about Zoe who you may know because
they're a sponsor of this podcast and
I'm an investor in the company you guys
know health is my number one priority
Zoe's growth story has been absolutely
incredible so far they're doing science
at a scale that I've never seen before
because of their members and recent
breakthroughs and research they can now
continue to offer the most
scientifically Advanced gut health test
on the market previously the test
allowed them to analyze 30 bacteria
types in your gut but now thanks to new
science they've identified a 100
bacteria types this is a huge step
forward and there's nothing else that's
available even close to it on the market
at all so to find out more and to get
started on your Zoe Journey visit
zoe.com
stepen you can use my exclusive code CEO
10 for 10% off don't tell anybody about
that okay just for you guys what is the
most important thing we haven't spoken
about today gosh I think we touched on a
lot of stuff but let's talk about
resistance training real quick okay um
you know a lot of people think
resistance training is just you know for
for vanity and for Meatheads
and we see now resistance training
decreases the risk of cancer decreases
the risk of heart
disease de drastically decreases the
risk of sarcopenia of Falls of broken
bones you know people talk about calcium
vitamin D probably the single best thing
you can do to improve your bone density
is to resistance strain and you know
you'll hear people say well I'm 40 or
I'm 50 or I'm 60 it doesn't matter you
can still put on muscle in in fact um
right across the street from where I was
doing my PhD they took basically frail
elderly people who had trouble like
sitting and standing up and put them
through like I think it I want to say it
was a 16we program and resistance for
them started out just squatting to a
high chair you know and then slowly they
lowered it down lowered it down and some
of them started using weights as well
they saw significant increases in their
muscle mass as you know older people so
you can still put on muscle even getting
older in fact um who is a uh I think
Alan Aragon he's another good uh
nutrition person on social media his he
was posting a video of his father
showing I think his father's like over
80 years old and was doing goblet squats
with like a 50 lb kettle bell you know
the amount of quality of life
Improvement you can get in people from
either resistant training throughout the
course of their life or just getting
them started regardless of age it's a
huge Improvement in quality of life do
you know what I think though I think I'm
going to be honest here right mhm this
morning I was I got up right and um my
like lower back hurt a little bit and I
remember thinking the first thought is
oh God I'm getting older that's why that
that is and I remember thinking oh I
should probably question that thought
because that's a self-fulfilling
prophecy in a way I if you start to see
yourself becoming less mobile
and less flexible your brain you kind of
you chalk it off as an inevitability of
Aging therefore you do nothing about it
therefore it gets worse whereas really
this other thought came into my mind
which was okay go to the gym and train
your lower back to strengthen it one of
the most damaging messages that
Physicians have given is when people
have pain in an area they tell them to
stop doing
activity as you age you are going to
have pain you can be strong and have
pain or you can be weak and have pain my
uh I love my dad great dude very
sedentary right he has really bad
sciatica he doesn't lift
weights but if you lift weights you it
actually has been shown to decrease back
pain like on the whole yeah like when
you do what I do where you're like you
know lifting cars essentially yeah like
I'm when you're so it's funny I'll post
videos of me lifting like once a week um
just cuz most people don't care about me
lifting they just want to get
information out of me and the comments
are always you know isn't that bad for
your lower back or you know isn't that
going to and I and uh are they'll say
you've had so many injuries I said I've
been doing this 25 years show me an
athlete who's competed at a really high
level for two decades who also doesn't
have a laundry list of injuries and pain
Tiger Wood swings a golf club he had all
kinds of back issues and knee issues and
leg issues
right activity is medicine yes if you're
doing it at a very high level athletes
what's the dosage needed to improve at
the highest level of exercise is always
going to be right up against what will
get you injured because you get to the
point where you simply can't recover
from it enough and that's why actually
if you look at like what actually
prevents injuries it's not stretching
it's not Mobility work it's not warmup
it's sleep psychological stress
reduction those are two of the main
movers and and just load management
appropriate load management we could get
into a whole thing on pain science but
one of the really damaging messages is
well took an MRI your lower back and you
know got a bulge disc so just can't lift
out
anymore if you my ride my lower back
right now I promise you bulge and
herniated this I'm sure I do but I don't
have pain and we there was a study done
where they I think they MRI like people
over 40 who were asymptomatic had no
back pain like I think almost half of
them had bulged or herniated this so
we've got this like model where it's oh
if you have pain you must have damage
and if you have damage you must have
pain
and it doesn't really work that way I
mean look at um people who lose limbs
they have pain not just at the stump but
where the limb used to be they sense
pain pain is just as much a
psychological experience as it is an
actual tissue damage experience and when
you get things that are um that are
painful for years your tissues heal in 6
to 12 months for most
things but if you're still having pain
that's because you've developed a sense
ensity to that particular area and and
so one of the worst things for pain is
becoming
inactive but the reason Physicians do
this and Orthopedics do this is it's
straight up a liability coverage because
if they if somebody says you
know you have pain but you could
probably go back and you know you back
off your load a little bit on your lifts
and you know progressively work it back
up you probably be fine well if they go
in and then they injure themselves guess
who's going to complain about the doctor
give them a one star review and say they
caused me to blow out my back
right but if you look at this stuff I
mean on the whole resistance training
decreases pain I want to build my
muscles Lane like your muscles I want
muscles like yours um question on the
way that I'm working out just sort of
practical advice do I have to work out
to sort of overload till I fail to to to
build my muscles so that they're like
yours great question so
uh if I had to say how to build muscles
like me BS three hours a day you know um
can we use AI to shrink
them Stephen just having the biggest
arms in the podcast um what matters for
building muscle we think um we we have a
the amount of hypertrophy research in
the last 10 years has absolutely
exploded compared to what it was before
and hypertrophy is muscle growth is what
we're talking
about
what seems to be the cause of it is
what's called mechanical tension so just
creating a lot of tension on the muscle
because now we're actually having
studies coming out we're doing like hard
stretching they actually see increased
muscle growth from like sustained hard
stretching there was a a study done um
with the calf muscles so they put them
in this contraption where basically
they're like stretching their calves and
holding it there I think I can't
remember what the duration was but it
was it was a long time right and they
were comparing that to traditional
resistance training and it was I mean it
was a pretty painful stretch I think
they said it was like a seven or eight
or nine out of 10 in terms of pain level
for the
stretch but they built as much muscle as
people who were doing calves three times
a week resistance training I think they
were doing these stretches every day so
it was it was pretty intense but that's
really interesting right because even if
you don't have weight you can still
create that tension through stretching
right um now the stretching again not
your traditional like you know it it's
pretty intense and pretty painful I
would argue that resistance training is
probably a more practical methodology to
getting it and more fun but in terms of
mechanical tension it does to maximize
muscle growth so we always have to be
careful about
like a lot of things can cause muscle
growth but we're talking about
absolutely maxing muscle growth you do
have to get close to volutional failure
which is basically like if I'm doing say
a bicep curl right or maybe a bench
press better example I'm doing reps
reps like and it start that's failure
right the research suggests you don't
have to go to failure but you have to
get pretty darn close within a couple
reps you know and if you've never
trained a failure it's actually really
hard to know what that feels like um and
so like and actually in in research
studies where they take people who are
beginner
intermediate and they ask them like they
have them do a set and they ask them hey
how many more reps could have you gotten
they underestimate by like five yeah um
especially difficult when you're
training alone as something like bench
press if if I fail the thing back it
[__] so I'm like I've put in a buffer of
maybe three reps there just so that I
don't embarrass myself in front of you
know exactly um mechanical
tension appears to be cumulative and
what I mean by that is if it was just
about creating as much tension as
possible just load the bar up and just
do one rep right so it's it's cumulative
throughout a
set now the way I like to describe it is
intensity is the medicine and the number
of hard sets which number of sets close
to failure is the dosage now when you
first start um you can get results on a
very low dosage because your body has
literally done nothing it'll grow off
anything as you progress I remember when
you first started lifting You' add 5 10
pounds every week right like clockwork
well eventually you can't add that
anymore right but you can still a lot of
times you can increase the Reps right
with the same weight well eventually you
can't do that anymore so how do you
continue to progress well you can add
more hard sets and what you mean by hard
sets uh volume so for example if I'm
let's just take bench press again right
like let's say I'm doing three sets
close to failure and eventually stop
progressing I can add another set and
that is still another form of
progressive overload right because again
mechanical tension is
cumulative
and I mean there is there's some debate
about this in the the resistance
training field but for the most part I
would say it's generally agreed upon by
most experts that higher volumes improve
muscle growth relative to lower volumes
meaning more hard sets and it doesn't
really seem to matter about machines
versus free weights either uh seem to
cause equal kinds of muscle growth so
when it comes to building muscle the
cool thing is you got a lot of options
and if you have pain doing one thing you
know joint pain whatever lower back pain
try something else fantastic news for me
Lane we have a closing tradition on this
podcast okay where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to leave it
for and the question that's been left
for you oh I like this I know what my
question will be your one's a really
difficult
one okay so I don't get to see it until
I open this book but Jack has a has a
little peek before I ask the guest but
no it actually wasn't Andy cuz there was
one person between them and they're the
person that left this question for you
very difficult
question I
think have you ever stayed in a
relationship that was harming you and
why yeah
um because of a lot of
reasons one being uh perception from
other people I felt like I had to make
it work um the other being because of
some of the remnants of
bullying
um I found it very hard to trust myself
in personal relationships
to I could be easily talked into me
being the problem for everything and I'm
not saying that I was never the problem
cuz I definitely was I've made a lot of
mistakes in personal relationships and
I've I have my own toxic behaviors that
I know I do um but yes I have definitely
stayed in a relationship too long and I
think one of the hardest things for me
and for a lot of people
is knowing when is it time
to give up and when is it time to push
through and I don't think we
have I don't think anybody has a clear
parameter but for me staying in was not
trusting myself not trusting my gut
and feeling like I had to make it work
because of the kids or because of this
or because of whatever because of a a
whole host of of many things and again
you know I I think
I'm not a relationship expert but you
know i' I've I've gone to therapy for
eight years now um one of my good
friends John delone is an expert on this
and and very rarely does a relationship
break down because of just one person it
it's usually a dynamic
and but I think that is one of the
hardest things to figure out
when when is it time
because we talked about like not
quitting you know these sorts of things
but there's also
like sometimes it's not quitting it's
just moving on to possibly something
better right and learning from what
happened and yeah that is a really tough
question and um I've definitely stayed
in things too long and not just not just
like romantic relationships but also
like um business Partnerships
friendships you know where it became
highly
toxic and again um I think the next
hardest thing to do after
that is looking back and going what did
I contribute to that
Lan in my life I've lost people I've
lost a lot of you know people along the
way from you know grandparents um
friends lady who used to was sort of my
proxy mother when I was Jer died in a
motorcycle accident um and it's only in
those moments that you you kind of have
the regrets of all the things that you
could have said you know you you wish
you could go back and often for people
somewhat similar to me somewhat maybe
similar to you who have had struggles
with expressing their
emotions um we probably have the
greatest amount of regret because we
found it harder to maybe tell these
people when we had the chance so my
closing question for you which is a
question of my own MH is if right now
you could send a message
to your kids mhm and I'm going to let
you send one as well to your granddad
and your dad and it was the last thing
you were going to
say what would you
say uh okay my
kids I would
say of course I love you more than
anything um you God dang it
you um you fulfilled a whole in my life
I didn't know I had
um and
I wish I could go back and do a lot of
things differently but I love you more
than
anything
and I don't care what you do with your
life find something that you love and it
is a positive contributor to the
world and go do that
and try to make somebody else's life
better along the
way and to my dad I would
say thank you like
for not following in your dad's
footsteps and not like stepping in front
of that wildfire and saying not on my
watch
sorry um you know my dad's not perfect
but both my mom and dad are really great
people and um you know
um they've they've um struggled with
some health issues
um and um you know if I had to say one
thing it would be you know thanks for
always believing in me always having my
back accepting me for who I was
in some ways I feel like they're the
only people who always accepted me for
who I was and they never put
expectations on me for what I want to do
with my life when I told them I wanted
to get into bodybuilding they were like
oh this seems weird but okay when my
first bodybuilding show they were the
loudest people up there supporting me
you know they're um you know when I won
worlds in
2022 I was going through a very hard
personal time in my life um basically
the front end of a divorce and it had
just kind of come to a head um like just
the Whirlwind kind of chaos stuff and my
mom called me they were they were
watching online um with my kids and my
mom was like son how the hell did you
just do that with everything going on
your life how did you do
that and um you know they've just always
been such big supporters of me even when
they didn't understand you know my mom
didn't understand like you know every
what are you studying again what are you
study again but you know came to my PhD
exit seminar you know Mom was in every
baseball game growing up uh dad was on
the road a lot but you know couldn't um
but came to everything he could you know
they they they showed up for me a lot
and I knew you know I knew I was loved
and so if I had to say anything to them
it would just be thank you for
everything that you did and when I had
kids I was like six weeks in I called my
mom I'm like oh my God you did did all
this stuff for me and I gave you all
that grief I'm so sorry you know um so
yeah they're amazing and if I had to say
something to my grandfather it would
just be God um you know I would give
somebody asked me this the other day I
was I would give anything to have five
more minutes of my granddad and ask him
so many questions about life that I just
didn't know enough about to even ask the
question you know cuz the man just oozed
wisdom you know but if I had to say
anything I'm like I would just say
thanks for what you did for your family
um you know my grandfather when he
passed I mean this is a man who had like
he had his first heart attack in his 50s
and this back in the 19 like late SE
like 1970s when like open heart surgery
was like carpentry you know his expect
his like life expectation I think was
five years at the time he was in the
Battle of the Bulge the deadliest battle
in World War II um One More Story um he
um I forget what country he was in but
he was supposed to go on leave the next
day and a convoy was coming through and
it was going to the place where he was
going to go on leave right behind the
lines and uh his commanding officer said
hey why don't you just take it like just
go
today that night uh a German soldier
dropped a grenade down and killed his
entire
unit and
sorry
dang I didn't think you'd give me to cry
in this podcast man um so much uh and he
said you know after that day I
just everything was I was living on
borrowed time in my opinion he's like I
should have been down there and uh he
said I get up every day I look at the
obituary and if I'm not in it I figure
I'm good for another day and uh he had I
think three heart attacks three open
heart surgeries two strokes he had a
boat fall on him long story um so this
guy we always joked he had nine lives
and um whenever um he was on his
deathbed I mean we kind of it was we
knew like six weeks in advance he had
kind of multi-stem just basically old
age and um it never occurred to me I was
20 years old it never sorry 22 it never
occurred to me the idea of how you
die as being so
important and he went exactly how you
would draw it up um you know he was in
the hospice so he was at his home his
whole family was around him and again he
was the funniest man I ever knew and I
walked in and all the seats are
taken and he's still Lucid
talking and um I said uh he had his
little like portable toilet you know but
he hadn't been using it whatever the
seat was down and I said do you mind if
I sit here cuz I was going to sit next
to him and he said yeah you can't clog
that one up cuz I was known in my family
for clogging toilets right so he's still
cracking jokes on his deathbed and even
like the doctor asked him when he was
basically the doctor telling him hey
you've got like six weeks left doctor
said hey we you know you're an organ
donor but we can't really use anything
uh you know it's all bad basically would
you be interested in donating your body
as a caver for Med students he goes I
always wanted to go to med school I
figured it's the only way I'm getting
there
now so just like had this great outlook
on life you know and
um just when he passed um I
remember
sorry my mom looking at him and saying
it's okay Dad it's okay we're going to
be
okay and uh I wasn't even sad because
I'm like that guy he got every bit out
of it he he milked life for everything
he had had a great family and so many
people who loved him and if I could just
have that kind of impact even half that
impact on my family oh man that'd be
worth so much to me so I would just tell
him thank you for being an
inspiration Lane you have been you've
been exactly that you've had an impact
on millions of people's of lives and I
think back to that young kid five six
seven years old and I think back to what
you said about fighting your way out of
it you fought your way out of all of
that to now Inspire and impact millions
and millions of people's of lives that
you'll never get to meet in such a
positive way in the same way and with
the same integrity and fight that your
granddad so clearly had it's funny CU
when you went through all of those
people I saw an element of you in every
single one of them and I think that's a
credit to all to them but it's also a
credit to you and I know that if your
granddad was I'm sure he's watching us
now cracking jokes about you
not my toilet habits yeah but I'm sure
he'd be so incredibly proud of you
because of the work you've done but
continue to do so thank you so much for
your time today thank you especially for
your um honesty and openness because you
have no idea how many people that side
of you the willingness to be honest
about faults and nuanced about yourself
as you are within your work will have on
millions and millions of people's of
lives I feel richer for having this
conversation so thank you Lane thank you
I I I've never cried a podcast like that
but you know I actually uh it was kind
of cathartic you know I was thinking of
a lot of different things while I was
going on so thank you for having me
[Music]
on